The	Project	Gutenberg	EBook	of	A	Yankee	in	the	Trenches,	by	R.	Derby	Holmes This	eBook	is	for	the	use	of	anyone	anywhere	at	no	cost	and	with

almost	no	restrictions	whatsoever.		You	may	copy	it,	give	it	away	or

re-use	it	under	the	terms	of	the	Project	Gutenberg	License	included

with	this	eBook	or	online	at	www.gutenberg.net

Title:	A	Yankee	in	the	Trenches

Author:	R.	Derby	Holmes

Release	Date:	August	25,	2004	[EBook	#13279]

Language:	English

***	START	OF	THIS	PROJECT	GUTENBERG	EBOOK	A	YANKEE	IN	THE	TRENCHES	***

Produced	by	Janet	Kegg	and	the	Project	Gutenberg	Online	Distributed

Proofreading	Team

Corporal	Holmes	in	the	Uniform	of	The	22nd	London	Battalion,	Queen's	Royal

West	Surrey	Regiment,	H.M.	Imperial	Army.	<i>frontispiece</i>





A	YANKEE

IN	THE	TRENCHES

By





R.	DERBY	HOLMES

CORPORAL	OF	THE	22D	LONDON	BATTALION	OF	THE

QUEEN'S	ROYAL	WEST	SURREY	REGIMENT

ILLUSTRATED	FROM	PHOTOGRAPHS

BOSTON

LITTLE,	BROWN,	AND	COMPANY

1918

Dedication

TO	 MARION	 A.	 PUTTEE,	 SOUTHALL,

MIDDLESEX,	ENGLAND,	I	DEDICATE

THIS	 BOOK	 AS	 A	 TOKEN	 OF

APPRECIATION

FOR

ALL

THE

LOVING	 THOUGHTS	 AND	 DEEDS

BESTOWED	UPON	ME	WHEN	I	WAS	A

STRANGER	IN	A	STRANGE	LAND





FOREWORD

I	have	tried	as	an	American	in	writing	this	book	to	give	the	public	a	complete

view	of	the	trenches	and	life	on	the	Western	Front	as	it	appeared	to	me,	and	also my	impression	of	conditions	and	men	as	I	found	them.	It	has	been	a	pleasure	to

write	 it,	 and	 now	 that	 I	 have	 finished	 I	 am	 genuinely	 sorry	 that	 I	 cannot	 go further.	On	the	lecture	tour	I	find	that	people	ask	me	questions,	and	I	have	tried in	this	book	to	give	in	detail	many	things	about	the	quieter	side	of	war	that	to	an audience	 would	 seem	 too	 tame.	 I	 feel	 that	 the	 public	 want	 to	 know	 how	 the soldiers	 live	 when	 not	 in	 the	 trenches,	 for	 all	 the	 time	 out	 there	 is	 not	 spent	 in killing	and	carnage.	As	in	the	case	of	all	men	in	the	trenches,	I	heard	things	and stories	 that	 especially	 impressed	 me,	 so	 I	 have	 written	 them	 as	 hearsay,	 not taking	to	myself	credit	as	their	originator.	I	trust	that	the	reader	will	find	as	much joy	in	the	cockney	character	as	I	did	and	which	I	have	tried	to	show	the	public; let	 me	 say	 now	 that	 no	 finer	 body	 of	 men	 than	 those	 Bermondsey	 boys	 of	 my battalion	could	be	found.

I	think	it	fair	to	say	that	in	compiling	the	trench	terms	at	the	end	of	this	book I	have	not	copied	any	war	book,	but	I	have	given	in	each	case	my	own	version	of

the	words,	though	I	will	confess	that	the	idea	and	necessity	of	having	such	a	list sprang	from	reading	Sergeant	Empey's	"Over	the	Top."	It	would	be	impossible	to write	a	book	that	the	people	would	understand	without	the	aid	of	such	a	glossary.

It	 is	 my	 sincere	 wish	 that	 after	 reading	 this	 book	 the	 reader	 may	 have	 a clearer	conception	of	what	this	great	world	war	means	and	what	our	soldiers	are

contending	with,	and	that	it	may	awaken	the	American	people	to	the	danger	of

Prussianism	so	that	when	in	the	future	there	is	a	call	for	funds	for	Liberty	Loans, Red	Cross	work,	or	Y.M.C.A.,	there	will	be	no	slacking,	for	they	form	the	real

triangular	sign	to	a	successful	termination	of	this	terrible	conflict.

R.	DERBY	HOLMES.

CONTENTS

FOREWORD





LIST	OF	ILLUSTRATIONS

I			JOINING	THE	BRITISH	ARMY

II			GOING	IN

III			A	TRENCH	RAID

IV			A	FEW	DAYS'	REST	IN	BILLETS

V			FEEDING	THE	TOMMIES

VI			HIKING	TO	VIMY	RIDGE

VII			FASCINATION	OF	PATROL	WORK

VIII			ON	THE	GO

IX			FIRST	SIGHT	OF	THE	TANKS

X			FOLLOWING	THE	TANKS	INTO	BATTLE

XI			PRISONERS

XII			I	BECOME	A	BOMBER

XIII			BACK	ON	THE	SOMME	AGAIN

XIV			THE	LAST	TIME	OVER	THE	TOP

XV			BITS	OF	BLIGHTY

XVI			SUGGESTIONS	FOR	"SAMMY"

GLOSSARY	OF	ARMY	SLANG

LIST	OF	ILLUSTRATIONS

Corporal	 Holmes	 in	 the	 Uniform	 of	 the	 22nd	 London	 Battalion,

Queen's	 Royal	 West	 Surrey	 Regiment,	 H.M.	 Imperial	 Army

	 Frontispiece

Reduced	Facsimile	of	Discharge	Certificate	of	Character

A	Heavy	Howitzer,	Under	Camouflage

Over	the	Top	on	a	Raid

Cooking	Under	Difficulties

Head-on	View	of	a	British	Tank

Corporal	Holmes	with	Staff	Nurse	and	Another	Patient,	at	Fulham

Military	Hospital,	London,	S.W.

Corporal	 Holmes	 with	 Company	 Office	 Force,	 at	 Winchester,

England,	a	Week	Prior	to	Discharge





A	YANKEE	IN	THE	TRENCHES





CHAPTER	I

JOINING	THE	BRITISH	ARMY

Once,	on	the	Somme	in	the	fall	of	1916,	when	I	had	been	over	the	top	and

was	 being	 carried	 back	 somewhat	 disfigured	 but	 still	 in	 the	 ring,	 a	 cockney stretcher	bearer	shot	this	question	at	me:

"Hi	 sye,	 Yank.	 Wot	 th'	 bloody	 'ell	 are	 you	 in	 this	 bloomin'	 row	 for?	 Ayen't there	no	trouble	t'	'ome?"

And	for	the	life	of	me	I	couldn't	answer.	After	more	than	a	year	in	the	British

service	I	could	not,	on	the	spur	of	the	moment,	say	exactly	why	I	was	there.

To	 be	 perfectly	 frank	 with	 myself	 and	 with	 the	 reader	 I	 had	 no	 very	 lofty motives	 when	 I	 took	 the	 King's	 shilling.	 When	 the	 great	 war	 broke	 out,	 I	 was mildly	 sympathetic	 with	 England,	 and	 mighty	 sorry	 in	 an	 indefinite	 way	 for France	and	Belgium;	but	my	sympathies	were	not	strong	enough	in	any	direction

to	get	me	into	uniform	with	a	chance	of	being	killed.	Nor,	at	first,	was	I	able	to work	up	any	compelling	hate	for	Germany.	The	abstract	idea	of	democracy	did

not	figure	in	my	calculations	at	all.

However,	as	the	war	went	on,	it	became	apparent	to	me,	as	I	suppose	it	must

have	 to	 everybody,	 that	 the	 world	 was	 going	 through	 one	 of	 its	 epochal upheavals;	and	I	figured	that	with	so	much	history	in	the	making,	any	unattached young	man	would	be	missing	it	if	he	did	not	take	a	part	in	the	big	game.

I	 had	 the	 fondness	 for	 adventure	 usual	 in	 young	 men.	 I	 liked	 to	 see	 the wheels	go	round.	And	so	it	happened	that,	when	the	war	was	about	a	year	and	a

half	old,	I	decided	to	get	in	before	it	was	too	late.

On	second	thought	I	won't	say	that	it	was	purely	love	for	adventure	that	took

me	 across.	 There	 may	 have	 been	 in	 the	 back	 of	 my	 head	 a	 sneaking	 extra fondness	 for	 France,	 perhaps	 instinctive,	 for	 I	 was	 born	 in	 Paris,	 although	 my parents	 were	 American	 and	 I	 was	 brought	 to	 Boston	 as	 a	 baby	 and	 have	 lived here	since.

Whatever	my	motives	for	joining	the	British	army,	they	didn't	have	time	to

crystallize	 until	 I	 had	 been	 wounded	 and	 sent	 to	 Blighty,	 which	 is	 trench	 slang for	 England.	 While	 recuperating	 in	 one	 of	 the	 pleasant	 places	 of	 the	 English country-side,	I	had	time	to	acquire	a	perspective	and	to	discover	that	I	had	been fighting	 for	 democracy	 and	 the	 future	 safety	 of	 the	 world.	 I	 think	 that	 my experience	in	this	respect	is	like	that	of	most	of	the	young	Americans	who	have

volunteered	for	service	under	a	foreign	flag.

I	decided	to	get	into	the	big	war	game	early	in	1916.	My	first	thought	was	to

go	into	the	ambulance	service,	as	I	knew	several	men	in	that	work.	One	of	them

described	the	driver's	life	about	as	follows.	He	said:

"The	 blessés	curse	you	because	you	jolt	them.	The	doctors	curse	you	because you	 don't	 get	 the	 blessés	 in	 fast	 enough.	 The	 Transport	 Service	 curse	 you because	you	get	in	the	way.	You	eat	standing	up	and	don't	sleep	at	all.	You're	as likely	 as	 anybody	 to	 get	 killed,	 and	 all	 the	 glory	 you	 get	 is	 the	 War	 Cross,	 if you're	lucky,	and	you	don't	get	a	single	chance	to	kill	a	Hun."

That	settled	the	ambulance	for	me.	I	hadn't	wanted	particularly	to	kill	a	Hun

until	 it	 was	 suggested	 that	 I	 mightn't.	 Then	 I	 wanted	 to	 slaughter	 a	 whole division.

So	 I	 decided	 on	 something	 where	 there	 would	 be	 fighting.	 And	 having

decided,	 I	 thought	 I	 would	 "go	 the	 whole	 hog"	 and	 work	 my	 way	 across	 to England	on	a	horse	transport.

One	day	in	the	first	part	of	February	I	went,	at	what	seemed	an	early	hour,	to

an	office	on	 Commercial	Street,	Boston,	 where	they	were	 advertising	for	 horse tenders	for	England.	About	three	hundred	men	were	earlier	than	I.	It	seemed	as

though	every	beach-comber	and	patriot	in	New	England	was	trying	to	get	across.

I	didn't	get	the	job,	but	filed	my	application	and	was	lucky	enough	to	be	signed on	for	a	sailing	on	February	22	on	the	steam-ship	 Cambrian,	bound	for	London.

Reduced	Facsimile	of	Discharge	Certificate	Of	Character.

We	 spent	 the	 morning	 of	 Washington's	 Birthday	 loading	 the	 horses.	 These government	 animals	 were	 selected	 stock	 and	 full	 of	 ginger.	 They	 seemed	 to know	 that	 they	 were	 going	 to	 France	 and	 resented	 it	 keenly.	 Those	 in	 my	 care seemed	to	regard	my	attentions	as	a	personal	affront.

We	had	a	strenuous	forenoon	getting	the	horses	aboard,	and	sailed	at	noon.

After	we	had	herded	in	the	livestock,	some	of	the	officers	herded	up	the	herders.

I	drew	a	pink	slip	with	two	numbers	on	it,	one	showing	the	compartment	where	I was	supposed	to	sleep,	the	other	indicating	my	bunk.

That	 compartment	 certainly	 was	 a	 glory-hole.	 Most	 of	 the	 men	 had	 been drunk	the	night	before,	and	the	place	had	the	rich,	balmy	fragrance	of	a	water-front	 saloon.	 Incidentally	 there	 was	 a	 good	 deal	 of	 unauthorized	 and

undomesticated	livestock.	I	made	a	limited	acquaintance	with	that	pretty,	playful little	creature,	the	"cootie,"	who	was	to	become	so	familiar	in	the	trenches	later on.	He	wasn't	called	a	cootie	aboard	ship,	but	he	was	the	same	bird.

Perhaps	 the	 less	 said	 about	 that	 trip	 across	 the	 better.	 It	 lasted	 twenty-one days.	 We	 fed	 the	 animals	 three	 times	 a	 day	 and	 cleaned	 the	 stalls	 once	 on	 the trip.	 I	 got	 chewed	 up	 some	 and	 stepped	 on	 a	 few	 times.	 Altogether	 the experience	was	good	intensive	training	for	the	trench	life	to	come;	especially	the bunks.	Those	sleeping	quarters	sure	were	close	and	crawly.

We	landed	in	London	on	Saturday	night	about	nine-thirty.	The	immigration

inspectors	gave	us	a	quick	examination	and	we	were	turned	back	to	the	shipping

people,	who	paid	us	off,—two	pounds,	equal	to	about	ten	dollars	real	change.

After	 that	 we	 rode	 on	 the	 train	 half	 an	 hour	 and	 then	 marched	 through	 the streets,	darkened	to	fool	the	Zeps.	Around	one	o'clock	we	brought	up	at	Thrawl

Street,	at	the	lodgings	where	we	were	supposed	to	stop	until	we	were	started	for home.

The	place	where	we	were	quartered	was	a	typical	London	doss	house.	There

were	 forty	 beds	 in	 the	 room	 with	 mine,	 all	 of	 them	 occupied.	 All	 hands	 were snoring,	and	the	fellow	in	the	next	cot	was	going	it	with	the	cut-out	wide	open, breaking	all	records.	Most	of	the	beds	sagged	like	a	hammock.	Mine	humped	up

in	the	middle	like	a	pile	of	bricks.

I	was	up	early	and	was	directed	to	the	place	across	the	way	where	we	were	to

eat.	 It	 was	 labeled	 "Mother	 Wolf's.	 The	 Universal	 Provider."	 She	 provided	 just one	meal	of	weak	tea,	moldy	bread,	and	rancid	bacon	for	me.	After	that	I	went	to a	 hotel.	 I	 may	 remark	 in	 passing	 that	 horse	 tenders,	 going	 or	 coming	 or	 in between	whiles,	do	not	live	on	the	fat	of	the	land.

I	 spent	 the	 day—it	 was	 Sunday—seeing	 the	 sights	 of	 Whitechapel,

Middlesex	Street	or	Petticoat	Lane,	and	some	of	the	slums.	Next	morning	it	was

pretty	 clear	 to	 me	 that	 two	 pounds	 don't	 go	 far	 in	 the	 big	 town.	 I	 promptly boarded	 the	 first	 bus	 for	 Trafalgar	 Square.	 The	 recruiting	 office	 was	 just	 down

the	road	in	Whitehall	at	the	old	Scotland	Yard	office.

I	 had	 an	 idea	 when	 I	 entered	 that	 recruiting	 office	 that	 the	 sergeant	 would receive	 me	 with	 open	 arms.	 He	 didn't.	 Instead	 he	 looked	 me	 over	 with unqualified	scorn	and	spat	out,	"Yank,	ayen't	ye?"

And	I	in	my	innocence	briefly	answered,	"Yep."

"We	 ayen't	 tykin'	 no	 nootrals,"	 he	 said,	 with	 a	 sneer.	 And	 then:	 "Better	 go back	to	Hamerika	and	'elp	Wilson	write	'is	blinkin'	notes."

Well,	 I	 was	 mad	 enough	 to	 poke	 that	 sergeant	 in	 the	 eye.	 But	 I	 didn't.	 I retired	gracefully	and	with	dignity.

At	the	door	another	sergeant	hailed	me,	whispering	behind	his	hand,	"Hi	sye, mytie.	Come	around	in	the	mornin'.	Hi'll	get	ye	in."	And	so	it	happened.

Next	day	my	man	was	waiting	and	marched	me	boldly	up	to	the	same	chap

who	had	refused	me	the	day	before.

"'Ere's	a	recroot	for	ye,	Jim,"	says	my	friend.

Jim	never	batted	an	eye.	He	began	to	"awsk"	questions	and	to	fill	out	a	blank.

When	he	got	to	the	birthplace,	my	guide	cut	in	and	said,	"Canada."

The	only	place	I	knew	in	Canada	was	Campobello	Island,	a	place	where	we

camped	one	summer,	and	I	gave	that.	I	don't	think	that	anything	but	rabbits	was

ever	 born	 on	 Campobello,	 but	 it	 went.	 For	 that	 matter	 anything	 went.	 I discovered	afterward	that	the	sergeant	who	had	captured	me	on	the	street	got	five bob	(shillings)	for	me.

The	 physical	 examination	 upstairs	 was	 elaborate.	 They	 told	 me	 to	 strip, weighed	 me,	 and	 said	 I	 was	 fit.	 After	 that	 I	 was	 taken	 in	 to	 an	 officer—a	 real officer	this	time—who	made	me	put	my	hand	on	a	Bible	and	say	yes	to	an	oath

he	rattled	off.	Then	he	told	me	I	was	a	member	of	the	Royal	Fusiliers,	gave	me

two	shillings,	sixpence	and	ordered	me	to	report	at	the	Horse	Guards	Parade	next day.	I	was	in	the	British	army,—just	like	that!

I	spent	the	balance	of	the	day	seeing	the	sights	of	London,	and	incidentally

spending	my	coin.	When	I	went	around	to	the	Horse	Guards	next	morning,	two

hundred	 others,	 new	 rookies	 like	 myself,	 were	 waiting.	 An	 officer	 gave	 me another	two	shillings,	sixpence.	I	began	to	think	that	if	the	money	kept	coming

along	at	that	rate	the	British	army	might	turn	out	a	good	investment.	It	didn't.

That	morning	I	was	sent	out	to	Hounslow	Barracks,	and	three	days	later	was

transferred	 to	 Dover	 with	 twenty	 others.	 I	 was	 at	 Dover	 a	 little	 more	 than	 two months	and	completed	my	training	there.

Our	barracks	at	Dover	was	on	the	heights	of	the	cliffs,	and	on	clear	days	we

could	 look	 across	 the	 Channel	 and	 see	 the	 dim	 outlines	 of	 France.	 It	 was	 a fascination	 for	 all	 of	 us	 to	 look	 away	 over	 there	 and	 to	 wonder	 what	 fortunes were	 to	 come	 to	 us	 on	 the	 battle	 fields	 of	 Europe.	 It	 was	 perhaps	 as	 well	 that none	of	us	had	imagination	enough	to	visualize	the	things	that	were	ahead.

I	found	the	rookies	at	Dover	a	jolly,	companionable	lot,	and	I	never	found	the

routine	irksome.	We	were	up	at	five-thirty,	had	cocoa	and	biscuits,	and	then	an

hour	of	physical	drill	or	bayonet	practice.	At	eight	came	breakfast	of	tea,	bacon, and	 bread,	 and	 then	 we	 drilled	 until	 twelve.	 Dinner.	 Out	 again	 on	 the	 parade ground	until	three	thirty.	After	that	we	were	free.

Nights	 we	 would	 go	 into	 Dover	 and	 sit	 around	 the	 "pubs"	 drinking	 ale,	 or

"ayle"	as	the	cockney	says	it.

After	a	few	weeks,	when	we	were	hardened	somewhat,	they	began	to	inflict

us	 with	 the	 torture	 known	 as	 "night	 ops."	 That	 means	 going	 out	 at	 ten	 o'clock under	 full	 pack,	 hiking	 several	 miles,	 and	 then	 "manning"	 the	 trenches	 around the	town	and	returning	to	barracks	at	three	A.M.

This	 wouldn't	 have	 been	 so	 bad	 if	 we	 had	 been	 excused	 parades	 the

following	day.	But	no.	We	had	the	same	old	drills	except	the	early	one,	but	were allowed	to	"kip"	until	seven.

In	 the	 two	 months	 I	 completed	 the	 musketry	 course,	 was	 a	 good	 bayonet man,	and	was	well	grounded	in	bombing	practice.	Besides	that	I	was	as	hard	as

nails	and	had	learned	thoroughly	the	system	of	British	discipline.

I	had	supposed	that	it	took	at	least	six	months	to	make	a	soldier,—in	fact	had

been	told	that	one	could	not	be	turned	out	who	would	be	ten	per	cent	efficient	in less	than	that	time.	That	old	theory	is	all	wrong.	Modern	warfare	changes	so	fast that	the	only	thing	that	can	be	taught	a	man	is	the	basic	principles	of	discipline, bombing,	 trench	 warfare,	 and	 musketry.	 Give	 him	 those	 things,	 a	 well-conditioned	 body,	 and	 a	 baptism	 of	 fire,	 and	 he	 will	 be	 right	 there	 with	 the veterans,	doing	his	bit.

Two	months	was	all	our	crowd	got	at	any	rate,	and	they	were	as	good	as	the best,	if	I	do	say	it.

My	 training	 ended	 abruptly	 with	 a	 furlough	 of	 five	 days	 for	 Embarkation Leave,	that	is,	leave	before	going	to	France.	This	is	a	sort	of	good-by	vacation.

Most	fellows	realize	fully	that	it	may	be	their	last	look	at	Blighty,	and	they	take it	 rather	 solemnly.	 To	 a	 stranger	 without	 friends	 in	 England	 I	 can	 imagine	 that this	Embarkation	Leave	would	be	either	a	mighty	lonesome,	dismal	affair,	or	a

stretch	of	desperate,	homesick	dissipation.	A	chap	does	want	to	say	good-by	to

some	one	before	he	goes	away,	perhaps	to	die.	He	wants	to	be	loved	and	to	have

some	one	sorry	that	he	is	going.

I	was	invited	by	one	of	my	chums	to	spend	the	leave	with	him	at	his	home	in

Southall,	 Middlesex.	 His	 father,	 mother	 and	 sister	 welcomed	 me	 in	 a	 way	 that made	me	know	it	was	my	home	from	the	minute	I	entered	the	door.	They	took

me	 into	 their	 hearts	 with	 a	 simple	 hospitality	 and	 whole-souled	 kindness	 that	 I can	 never	 forget.	 I	 was	 a	 stranger	 in	 a	 strange	 land	 and	 they	 made	 me	 one	 of their	own.	I	shall	never	be	able	to	repay	all	the	loving	thoughts	and	deeds	of	that family	 and	 shall	 remember	 them	 while	 I	 live.	 My	 chum's	 mother	 I	 call	 Mother too.	It	is	to	her	that	I	have	dedicated	this	book.

After	 my	 delightful	 few	 days	 of	 leave,	 things	 moved	 fast.	 I	 was	 back	 in Dover	 just	 two	 days	 when	 I,	 with	 two	 hundred	 other	 men,	 was	 sent	 to Winchester.	Here	we	were	notified	that	we	were	transferred	to	the	Queen's	Royal

West	Surrey	Regiment.

This	news	brought	a	wild	howl	from	the	men.	They	wanted	to	stop	with	the

Fusiliers.	 It	 is	 part	 of	 the	 British	 system	 that	 every	 man	 is	 taught	 the	 traditions and	 history	 of	 his	 regiment	 and	 to	 know	 that	 his	 is	 absolutely	 the	 best	 in	 the whole	 army.	 In	 a	 surprisingly	 short	 time	 they	 get	 so	 they	 swear	 by	 their	 own regiment	and	by	their	officers,	and	they	protest	bitterly	at	a	transfer.

Personally	I	didn't	care	a	rap.	I	had	early	made	up	my	mind	that	I	was	a	very

small	pebble	on	the	beach	and	that	it	was	up	to	me	to	obey	orders	and	keep	my

mouth	shut.

On	June	17,	some	eighteen	hundred	of	us	were	moved	down	to	Southampton

and	 put	 aboard	 the	 transport	 for	 Havre.	 The	 next	 day	 we	 were	 in	 France,	 at Harfleur,	the	central	training	camp	outside	Havre.

We	were	supposed	to	undergo	an	intensive	training	at	Harfleur	in	the	various

forms	of	gas	and	protection	from	it,	barbed	wire	and	methods	of	construction	of entanglements,	musketry,	bombing,	and	bayonet	fighting.

Harfleur	was	a	miserable	place.	They	refused	to	let	us	go	in	town	after	drill.

Also	I	managed	to	let	myself	in	for	something	that	would	have	kept	me	in	camp

if	town	leave	had	been	allowed.

The	 first	 day	 there	 was	 a	 call	 for	 a	 volunteer	 for	 musketry	 instructor.	 I	 had qualified	and	jumped	at	it.	When	I	reported,	an	old	Scotch	sergeant	told	me	to	go to	 the	 quartermaster	 for	 equipment.	 I	 said	 I	 already	 had	 full	 equipment.

Whereupon	the	sergeant	laughed	a	rumbling	Scotch	laugh	and	told	me	I	had	to

go	into	kilts,	as	I	was	assigned	to	a	Highland	contingent.

I	 protested	 with	 violence	 and	 enthusiasm,	 but	 it	 didn't	 do	 any	 good.	 They gave	 me	 a	 dinky	 little	 pleated	 petticoat,	 and	 when	 I	 demanded	 breeks	 to	 wear underneath,	I	got	the	merry	ha	ha.	Breeks	on	a	Scotchman?	Never!

Well,	I	got	into	the	fool	things,	and	I	felt	as	though	I	was	naked	from	ankle	to wishbone.	I	couldn't	get	used	to	the	outfit.	I	am	naturally	a	modest	man.	Besides, my	architecture	was	never	intended	for	bare-leg	effects.	I	have	no	dimples	in	my knees.

So	I	began	an	immediate	campaign	for	transfer	back	to	the	Surreys.	I	got	it	at

the	end	of	ten	days,	and	with	it	came	a	hurry	call	from	somewhere	at	the	front

for	more	troops.





CHAPTER	II

GOING	IN

The	excitement	of	getting	away	from	camp	and	the	knowledge	that	we	were

soon	to	get	into	the	thick	of	the	big	game	pleased	most	of	us.	We	were	glad	to

go.	At	least	we	thought	so.

Two	hundred	of	us	were	loaded	into	side-door	Pullmans,	forty	to	the	car.	It

was	 a	 kind	 of	 sardine	 or	 Boston	 Elevated	 effect,	 and	 by	 the	 time	 we	 reached Rouen,	 twenty-four	 hours	 later,	 we	 had	 kinks	 in	 our	 legs	 and	 corns	 on	 our elbows.	 Also	 we	 were	 hungry,	 having	 had	 nothing	 but	 bully	 beef	 and	 biscuits.

We	made	"char",	which	is	trench	slang	for	tea,	in	the	station,	and	after	two	hours moved	up	the	line	again,	this	time	in	real	coaches.

Next	night	we	were	billeted	at	Barlin—don't	get	that	mixed	up	with	Berlin,

it's	 not	 the	 same—in	 an	 abandoned	 convent	 within	 range	 of	 the	 German	 guns.

The	roar	of	artillery	was	continuous	and	sounded	pretty	close.

Now	 and	 again	 a	 shell	 would	 burst	 near	 by	 with	 a	 kind	 of	 hollow	 "spung", but	for	some	reason	we	didn't	seem	to	mind.	I	had	expected	to	get	the	shivers	at the	 first	 sound	 of	 the	 guns	 and	 was	 surprised	 when	 I	 woke	 up	 in	 the	 morning after	a	solid	night's	sleep.

A	 message	 came	 down	 from	 the	 front	 trenches	 at	 daybreak	 that	 we	 were wanted	and	wanted	quick.	We	slung	together	a	dixie	of	char	and	some	bacon	and

bread	for	breakfast,	and	marched	around	to	the	"quarters",	where	they	issued	"tin hats",	 extra	 "ammo",	 and	 a	 second	 gas	 helmet.	 A	 good	 many	 of	 the	 men	 had been	out	before,	and	they	did	the	customary	"grousing"	over	the	added	load.

The	 British	 Tommy	 growls	 or	 grouses	 over	 anything	 and	 everything.	 He's never	 happy	 unless	 he's	 unhappy.	 He	 resents	 especially	 having	 anything

officially	 added	 to	 his	 pack,	 and	 you	 can't	 blame	 him,	 for	 in	 full	 equipment	 he certainly	is	all	dressed	up	like	a	pack	horse.

After	the	issue	we	were	split	up	into	four	lots	for	the	four	companies	of	the

battalion,	and	after	some	"wangling"	I	got	into	Company	C,	where	I	stopped	all the	 time	 I	 was	 in	 France.	 I	 was	 glad,	 because	 most	 of	 my	 chums	 were	 in	 that

unit.

We	got	into	our	packs	and	started	up	the	line	immediately.	As	we	neared	the

lines	we	were	extended	into	artillery	formation,	that	is,	spread	out	so	that	a	shell bursting	in	the	road	would	inflict	fewer	casualties.

At	 Bully-Grenay,	 the	 point	 where	 we	 entered	 the	 communication	 trenches, guides	 met	 us	 and	 looked	 us	 over,	 commenting	 most	 frankly	 and	 freely	 on	 our appearance.	 They	 didn't	 seem	 to	 think	 we	 would	 amount	 to	 much,	 and	 said	 so.

They	agreed	that	the	"bloomin'	Yank"	must	be	a	"bloody	fool"	to	come	out	there.

There	were	times	later	when	I	agreed	with	them.

It	began	to	rain	as	we	entered	the	communication	trench,	and	I	had	my	first

taste	of	mud.	That	is	literal,	for	with	mud	knee-deep	in	a	trench	just	wide	enough for	two	men	to	pass	you	get	smeared	from	head	to	foot.

Incidentally,	 as	 we	 approached	 nearer	 the	 front,	 I	 got	 my	 first	 smell	 of	 the dead.	 It	 is	 something	 you	 never	 get	 away	 from	 in	 the	 trenches.	 So	 many	 dead have	 been	 buried	 so	 hastily	 and	 so	 lightly	 that	 they	 are	 constantly	 being uncovered	by	shell	bursts.	The	acrid	stench	pervades	everything,	and	is	so	thick you	 can	 fairly	 taste	 it.	 It	 makes	 nearly	 everybody	 deathly	 sick	 at	 first,	 but	 one becomes	used	to	it	as	to	anything	else.

This	 communication	 trench	 was	 over	 two	 miles	 long,	 and	 it	 seemed	 like twenty.	We	finally	landed	in	a	support	trench	called	"Mechanics"	(every	trench has	a	name,	like	a	street),	and	from	there	into	the	first-line	trench.

I	have	to	admit	a	feeling	of	disappointment	in	that	first	trench.	I	don't	know

what	I	expected	to	see,	but	what	I	did	see	was	just	a	long,	crooked	ditch	with	a low	step	running	along	one	side,	and	with	sandbags	on	top.	Here	and	there	was	a

muddy,	 bedraggled	 Tommy	 half	 asleep,	 nursing	 a	 dirty	 and	 muddy	 rifle	 on

"sentry	 go."	 Everything	 was	 very	 quiet	 at	 the	 moment—no	 rifles	 popping,	 as	 I had	expected,	no	bullets	flying,	and,	as	it	happened,	absolutely	no	shelling	in	the whole	sector.

I	forgot	to	say	that	we	had	come	up	by	daylight.	Ordinarily	troops	are	moved

at	 night,	 but	 the	 communication	 trench	 from	 Bully-Grenay	 was	 very	 deep	 and was	 protected	 at	 points	 by	 little	 hills,	 and	 it	 was	 possible	 to	 move	 men	 in	 the daytime.

Arrived	in	the	front	trench,	the	sergeant-major	appeared,	crawling	out	of	his

dug-out—the	usual	place	for	a	sergeant-major—and	greeted	us	with,

"Keep	 your	 nappers	 down,	 you	 rooks.	 Don't	 look	 over	 the	 top.	 It	 ayen't

'ealthy."

It	 is	 the	 regular	 warning	 to	 new	 men.	 For	 some	 reason	 the	 first	 emotion	 of the	rookie	is	an	overpowering	curiosity.	He	wants	to	take	a	peep	into	No	Man's

Land.	 It	 feels	 safe	 enough	 when	 things	 are	 quiet.	 But	 there's	 always	 a	 Fritzie over	yonder	with	a	telescope-sighted	rifle,	and	it's	about	ten	to	one	he'll	get	you if	you	stick	the	old	"napper"	up	in	daylight.

The	Germans,	by	the	way,	have	had	the	"edge"	on	the	Allies	in	the	matter	of sniping,	 as	 in	 almost	 all	 lines	 of	 artillery	 and	 musketry	 practice.	 The	 Boche sniper	is	nearly	always	armed	with	a	periscope-telescope	rifle.	This	is	a	specially built	super-accurate	rifle	mounted	on	a	periscope	frame.	It	is	thrust	up	over	the parapet	 and	 the	 image	 of	 the	 opposing	 parapet	 is	 cast	 on	 a	 little	 ground-glass screen	 on	 which	 are	 two	 crossed	 lines.	 At	 one	 hundred	 fifty	 yards	 or	 less	 the image	is	brought	up	to	touching	distance	seemingly.	Fritz	simply	trains	his	piece on	some	low	place	or	anywhere	that	a	head	may	be	expected.	When	one	appears

on	the	screen,	he	pulls	the	trigger,—and	you	"click	it"	if	you	happen	to	be	on	the other	or	receiving	end.	The	shooter	never	shows	himself.

I	remember	the	first	time	I	looked	through	a	periscope	I	had	no	sooner	thrust

the	 thing	 up	 than	 a	 bullet	 crashed	 into	 the	 upper	 mirror,	 splintering	 it.	 Many times	I	have	stuck	up	a	cap	on	a	stick	and	had	it	pierced.

The	 British	 sniper,	 on	 the	 other	 hand—at	 least	 in	 my	 time—had	 a	 plain telescope	 rifle	 and	 had	 to	 hide	 himself	 behind	 old	 masonry,	 tree	 trunks,	 or anything	 convenient,	 and	 camouflaged	 himself	 in	 all	 sorts	 of	 ways.	 At	 that	 he was	constantly	in	danger.

I	 was	 assigned	 to	 Platoon	 10	 and	 found	 they	 were	 a	 good	 live	 bunch.

Corporal	Wells	was	the	best	of	the	lot,	and	we	became	fast	friends.	He	helped	me learn	 a	 lot	 of	 my	 new	 duties	 and	 the	 trench	 "lingo",	 which	 is	 like	 a	 new language,	especially	to	a	Yank.

Wells	started	right	in	to	make	me	feel	at	home	and	took	me	along	with	two

others	of	the	new	men	down	to	our	"apartments",	a	dug-out	built	for	about	four, and	housing	ten.

My	 previous	 idea	 of	 a	 dug-out	 had	 been	 a	 fairly	 roomy	 sort	 of	 cave,

somewhat	damp,	but	comparatively	comfortable.	Well,	this	hole	was	about	four and	a	half	feet	high—you	had	to	get	in	doubled	up	on	your	hands	and	knees—

about	five	by	six	feet	on	the	sides,	and	there	was	no	floor,	just	muck.	There	was some	sodden,	dirty	straw	and	a	lot	of	old	moldy	sandbags.	Seven	men	and	their

equipment	were	packed	in	here,	and	we	made	ten.

There	was	a	charcoal	brazier	going	in	the	middle	with	two	or	three	mess	tins

of	 char	 boiling	 away.	 Everybody	 was	 smoking,	 and	 the	 place	 stunk	 to	 high heaven,	or	it	would	have	if	there	hadn't	been	a	bit	of	burlap	over	the	door.

I	crowded	up	into	a	corner	with	my	back	against	the	mud	wall	and	my	knees

under	my	chin.	The	men	didn't	seem	overglad	to	see	us,	and	groused	a	good	deal

about	the	extra	crowding.	They	regarded	me	with	extra	disfavor	because	I	was	a

lance	 corporal,	 and	 they	 disapproved	 of	 any	 young	 whipper-snapper	 just	 out from	 Blighty	 with	 no	 trench	 experience	 pitchforked	 in	 with	 even	 a	 slight superior	rank.	I	had	thought	up	to	then	that	a	lance	corporal	was	pretty	near	as important	as	a	brigadier.

"We'll	soon	tyke	that	stripe	off	ye,	me	bold	lad,"	said	one	big	cockney.

They	 were	 a	 decent	 lot	 after	 all.	 Since	 we	 were	 just	 out	 from	 Blighty,	 they showered	 us	 with	 questions	 as	 to	 how	 things	 looked	 "t'	 'ome."	 And	 then somebody	asked	what	was	the	latest	song.	Right	here	was	where	I	made	my	hit

and	got	in	right.	I	sing	a	bit,	and	I	piped	up	with	the	newest	thing	from	the	music halls,	"Tyke	Me	Back	to	Blighty."	Here	it	is:

Tyke	me	back	to	dear	old	Blighty,

Put	me	on	the	tryne	for	London	town,

Just	tyke	me	over	there

And	drop	me	anywhere,

Manchester,	Leeds,	or	Birmingham,

I	don't	care.

I	want	to	go	see	me	best	gal;

Cuddlin'	up	soon	we'll	be,

Hytey	iddle	de	eyety.

Tyke	me	back	to	Blighty,

That's	the	plyce	for	me.

It	doesn't	look	like	much	and	I'm	afraid	my	rendition	of	cockney	dialect	into

print	 isn't	 quite	 up	 to	 Kipling's.	 But	 the	 song	 had	 a	 pretty	 little	 lilting	 melody,

and	it	went	big.	They	made	me	sing	it	about	a	dozen	times	and	were	all	joining in	at	the	end.

Then	they	got	sentimental—and	gloomy.

"Gawd	lumme!"	says	the	big	fellow	who	had	threatened	my	beloved	stripes.

"Wot	a	life.	Squattin'	'ere	in	the	bloody	mud	like	a	blinkin'	frog.	Fightin'	fer	wot?

Wot,	I	arsks	yer?	Gawd	lumme!	I'd	give	me	bloomin'	napper	to	stroll	down	the

Strand	 agyne	 wif	 me	 swagger	 stick	 an'	 drop	 in	 a	 private	 bar	 an'	 'ave	 me	 go	 of

'Aig	an'	'Aig."

"Garn,"	cuts	in	another	Tommy.	"Yer	blinkin'	'igh	wif	yer	wants,	ayen't	ye?

An'	yer	'Aig	an'	'Aig.	Drop	me	down	in	Great	Lime	Street	(Liverpool)	an'	it's	me fer	the	Golden	Sheaf,	and	a	pint	of	bitter,	an'	me	a	'oldin'	'Arriet's	'and	over	th'

bar.	I'm	a	courtin'	'er	when,"	etc.,	etc.

And	 then	 a	 fresh-faced	 lad	 chirps	 up:	 "T'	 'ell	 wif	 yer	 Lonnon	 an'	 yer whuskey.	 Gimme	 a	 jug	 o'	 cider	 on	 the	 sunny	 side	 of	 a	 'ay	 rick	 in	 old	 Surrey.

Gimme	a	happle	tart	to	go	wif	it.	Gawd,	I'm	fed	up	on	bully	beef."

And	so	it	went.	All	about	pubs	and	bar-maids	and	the	things	they'd	eat	and

drink,	and	all	of	it	Blighty.

They	 were	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 a	 discussion	 of	 what	 part	 of	 the	 body	 was	 most desirable	 to	 part	 with	 for	 a	 permanent	 Blighty	 wound	 when	 a	 young	 officer pushed	 aside	 the	 burlap	 and	 wedged	 in.	 He	 was	 a	 lieutenant	 and	 was	 in command	of	our	platoon.	His	name	was	Blofeld.

Blofeld	was	most	democratic.	He	shook	hands	with	the	new	men	and	said	he

hoped	we'd	be	live	wires,	and	then	he	told	us	what	he	wanted.	There	was	to	be	a

raid	the	next	night	and	he	was	looking	for	volunteers.

Nobody	spoke	for	a	long	minute,	and	then	I	offered.

I	think	I	spoke	more	to	break	the	embarrassing	silence	than	anything	else.	I

think,	too,	that	I	was	led	a	little	by	a	kind	of	youthful	curiosity,	and	it	may	be	that I	 wanted	 to	 appear	 brave	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 these	 men	 who	 so	 evidently	 held	 me more	or	less	in	contempt	as	a	newcomer.

Blofeld	 accepted	 me,	 and	 one	 of	 the	 other	 new	 men	 offered.	 He	 was	 taken too.

It	 turned	 out	 that	 all	 the	 older	 men	 were	 married	 and	 that	 they	 were	 not expected	to	volunteer.	At	least	there	was	no	disgrace	attaching	to	a	refusal.

After	Blofeld	left,	Sergeant	Page	told	us	we'd	better	get	down	to	"kip"	while we	could.	"Kip"	in	this	case	meant	closing	our	eyes	and	dozing.	I	sat	humped	up in	my	original	position	through	the	night.	There	wasn't	room	to	stretch	out.

Along	 toward	 morning	 I	 began	 to	 itch,	 and	 found	 I	 had	 made	 the

acquaintance	 of	 that	 gay	 and	 festive	 little	 soldier's	 enemy,	 the	 "cootie."	 The cootie,	 or	 the	 "chat"	 as	 he	 is	 called	 by	 the	 officers,	 is	 the	 common	 body	 louse.

Common	is	right.	I	never	got	rid	of	mine	until	I	left	the	service.	Sometimes	when I	get	to	thinking	about	it,	I	believe	I	haven't	yet.





CHAPTER	III

A	TRENCH	RAID

In	the	morning	the	members	of	the	raiding	party	were	taken	back	a	mile	or	so

to	the	rear	and	were	given	instruction	and	rehearsal.	This	was	the	first	raid	that

"Batt"	had	ever	tried,	and	the	staff	was	anxious	to	have	it	a	success.	There	were fifty	in	the	party,	and	Blofeld,	who	had	organized	the	raid,	beat	our	instructions into	us	until	we	knew	them	by	heart.

The	object	of	a	raid	is	to	get	into	the	enemy's	trenches	by	stealth	if	possible, kill	as	many	as	possible,	take	prisoners	if	practicable,	do	a	lot	of	damage,	and	get away	with	a	whole	hide.

We	 got	 back	 to	 the	 front	 trenches	 just	 before	 dark.	 I	 noticed	 a	 lot	 of	 metal cylinders	arranged	along	the	parapet.	They	were	about	as	big	as	a	stovepipe	and

four	feet	long,	painted	brown.	They	were	the	gas	containers.	They	were	arranged

about	 four	 or	 five	 to	 a	 traverse,	 and	 were	 connected	 up	 by	 tubes	 and	 were covered	 with	 sandbags.	 This	 was	 the	 poison	 gas	 ready	 for	 release	 over	 the	 top through	tubes.

A	Heavy	Howitzer,	Under	Camouflage.

The	 time	 set	 for	 our	 stunt	 was	 eleven	 P.M.	 Eleven	 o'clock	 was	 "zero."	 The system	on	the	Western	Front,	and,	in	fact,	all	fronts,	is	to	indicate	the	time	fixed for	 any	 event	 as	 zero.	 Anything	 before	 or	 after	 is	 spoken	 of	 as	 plus	 or	 minus zero.

Around	 five	 o'clock	 we	 were	 taken	 back	 to	 Mechanics	 trench	 and	 fed—a

regular	meal	with	plenty	of	everything,	and	all	good.	It	looked	rather	like	giving a	condemned	man	a	hearty	meal,	but	grub	is	always	acceptable	to	a	soldier.

After	that	we	blacked	our	faces.	This	is	always	done	to	prevent	the	whiteness

of	 the	 skin	 from	 showing	 under	 the	 flare	 lights.	 Also	 to	 distinguish	 your	 own men	when	you	get	to	the	Boche	trench.

Then	we	wrote	letters	and	gave	up	our	identification	discs	and	were	served

with	persuader	sticks	or	knuckle	knives,	and	with	"Mills"	bombs.

The	 persuader	 is	 a	 short,	 heavy	 bludgeon	 with	 a	 nail-studded	 head.	 You thump	Fritz	on	the	head	with	it.	Very	handy	at	close	quarters.	The	knuckle	knife is	a	short	dagger	with	a	heavy	brass	hilt	that	covers	the	hand.	Also	very	good	for close	work,	as	you	can	either	strike	or	stab	with	it.

We	moved	up	to	the	front	trenches	at	about	half-past	ten.	At	zero	minus	ten,

that	 is,	 ten	 minutes	 of	 eleven,	 our	 artillery	 opened	 up.	 It	 was	 the	 first bombardment	I	had	ever	been	under,	and	it	seemed	as	though	all	the	guns	in	the

world	 were	 banging	 away.	 Afterwards	 I	 found	 that	 it	 was	 comparatively	 light, but	it	didn't	seem	so	then.

The	 guns	 were	 hardly	 started	 when	 there	 was	 a	 sound	 like	 escaping	 steam.

Jerry	leaned	over	and	shouted	in	my	ear:	"There	goes	the	gas.	May	it	finish	the blighters."

Blofeld	came	dashing	up	just	then,	very	much	excited	because	he	found	we

had	not	put	on	our	masks,	through	some	slip-up	in	the	orders.	We	got	into	them

quick.	 But	 as	 it	 turned	 out	 there	 was	 no	 need.	 There	 was	 a	 fifteen-mile	 wind blowing,	 which	 carried	 the	 gas	 away	 from	 us	 very	 rapidly.	 In	 fact	 it	 blew	 it across	the	Boche	trenches	so	fast	that	it	didn't	bother	them	either.

The	barrage	fire	kept	up	right	up	to	zero,	as	per	schedule.	At	thirty	seconds

of	eleven	I	looked	at	my	watch	and	the	din	was	at	its	height.	At	exactly	eleven	it stopped	 short.	 Fritz	 was	 still	 sending	 some	 over,	 but	 comparatively	 there	 was silence.	After	the	ear-splitting	racket	it	was	almost	still	enough	to	hurt.

And	in	that	silence	over	the	top	we	went.

Lanes	had	been	cut	through	our	wire,	and	we	got	through	them	quickly.	The

trenches	were	about	one	hundred	twenty	yards	apart	and	we	still	had	nearly	one

hundred	 to	 go.	 We	 dropped	 and	 started	 to	 crawl.	 I	 skinned	 both	 my	 knees	 on something,	 probably	 old	 wire,	 and	 both	 hands.	 I	 could	 feel	 the	 blood	 running into	my	puttees,	and	my	rifle	bothered	me	as	I	was	afraid	of	jabbing	Jerry,	who

was	just	ahead	of	me	as	first	bayonet	man.

They	say	a	drowning	man	or	a	man	in	great	danger	reviews	his	past.	I	didn't.

I	spent	those	few	minutes	wondering	when	the	machine-gun	fire	would	come.

I	had	the	same	"gone"	feeling	in	the	pit	of	the	stomach	that	you	have	when you	drop	fast	in	an	elevator.	The	skin	on	my	face	felt	tight,	and	I	remember	that	I wanted	to	pucker	my	nose	and	pull	my	upper	lip	down	over	my	teeth.

We	 got	 clean	 up	 to	 their	 wire	 before	 they	 spotted	 us.	 Their	 entanglements had	 been	 flattened	 by	 our	 barrage	 fire,	 but	 we	 had	 to	 get	 up	 to	 pick	 our	 way through,	and	they	saw	us.

Instantly	 the	 "Very"	 lights	 began	 to	 go	 up	 in	 scores,	 and	 hell	 broke	 loose.

They	 must	 have	 turned	 twenty	 machine	 guns	 on	 us,	 or	 at	 us,	 but	 their	 aim evidently	was	high,	for	they	only	"clicked"	two	out	of	our	immediate	party.	We had	 started	 with	 ten	 men,	 the	 other	 fifty	 being	 divided	 into	 three	 more	 parties farther	down	the	line.

When	 the	 machine	 guns	 started,	 we	 charged.	 Jerry	 and	 I	 were	 ahead	 as bayonet	men,	with	the	rest	of	the	party	following	with	buckets	of	"Mills"	bombs and	"Stokeses."

It	was	pretty	light,	there	were	so	many	flares	going	up	from	both	sides.	When

I	jumped	on	the	parapet,	there	was	a	whaling	big	Boche	looking	up	at	me	with

his	rifle	resting	on	the	sandbags.	I	was	almost	on	the	point	of	his	bayonet.

For	 an	 instant	 I	 stood	 with	 a	 kind	 of	 paralyzed	 sensation,	 and	 there	 flashed through	my	mind	the	instructions	of	the	manual	for	such	a	situation,	only	I	didn't apply	those	instructions	to	this	emergency.

Instead	 I	 thought—if	 such	 a	 flash	 could	 be	 called	 thinking—how	 I,	 as	 an instructor,	would	have	told	a	rookie	to	act,	working	on	a	dummy.	I	had	a	sort	of detached	feeling	as	though	this	was	a	silly	dream.

Probably	this	hesitation	didn't	last	more	than	a	second.

Then,	out	of	the	corner	of	my	eye,	I	saw	Jerry	lunge,	and	I	lunged	too.	Why

that	Boche	did	not	fire	I	don't	know.	Perhaps	he	did	and	missed.	Anyhow	I	went

down	and	in	on	him,	and	the	bayonet	went	through	his	throat.

Jerry	had	done	his	man	in	and	all	hands	piled	into	the	trench.

Then	we	started	to	race	along	the	traverses.	We	found	a	machine	gun	and	put

an	 eleven-pound	 high-explosive	 "Stokes"	 under	 it.	 Three	 or	 four	 Germans appeared,	 running	 down	 communication	 trenches,	 and	 the	 bombers	 sent	 a	 few Millses	after	them.	Then	we	came	to	a	dug-out	door—in	fact,	several,	as	Fritz,

like	a	woodchuck,	always	has	more	than	one	entrance	to	his	burrow.	We	broke

these	 in	 in	 jig	 time	 and	 looked	 down	 a	 thirty-foot	 hole	 on	 a	 dug-out	 full	 of graybacks.	There	must	have	been	a	lot	of	them.	I	could	plainly	see	four	or	five

faces	looking	up	with	surprised	expressions.

Blofeld	chucked	in	two	or	three	Millses	and	away	we	went.

A	 little	 farther	 along	 we	 came	 to	 the	 entrance	 of	 a	 mine	 shaft,	 a	 kind	 of incline	running	toward	our	lines.	Blofeld	went	in	it	a	little	way	and	flashed	his light.	He	thought	it	was	about	forty	yards	long.	We	put	several	of	our	remaining Stokeses	in	that	and	wrecked	it.

Turning	 the	 corner	 of	 the	 next	 traverse,	 I	 saw	 Jerry	 drop	 his	 rifle	 and unlimber	his	persuader	on	a	huge	German	who	had	just	rounded	the	corner	of	the

"bay."	He	made	a	good	job	of	it,	getting	him	in	the	face,	and	must	have	simply caved	 him	 in,	 but	 not	 before	 he	 had	 thrown	 a	 bomb.	 I	 had	 broken	 my	 bayonet prying	the	dug-out	door	off	and	had	my	gun	up-ended—clubbed.

Over	the	Top	on	a	Raid.

When	I	saw	that	bomb	coming,	I	bunted	at	it	like	Ty	Cobb	trying	to	sacrifice.

It	was	the	only	thing	to	do.	I	choked	my	bat	and	poked	at	the	bomb	instinctively, and	 by	 sheer	 good	 luck	 fouled	 the	 thing	 over	 the	 parapet.	 It	 exploded	 on	 the other	side.

"Blimme	eyes,"	says	Jerry,	"that's	cool	work.	You	saved	us	the	wooden	cross that	time."

We	 had	 found	 two	 more	 machine	 guns	 and	 were	 planting	 Stokeses	 under

them	when	we	heard	the	Lewises	giving	the	recall	signal.	A	good	gunner	gets	so

he	can	play	a	tune	on	a	Lewis,	and	the	device	is	frequently	used	for	signals.	This time	he	thumped	out	the	old	one—"All	policemen	have	big	feet."	Rat-a-tat-tat—

tat,	tat.

It	didn't	come	any	too	soon.

As	we	scrambled	over	the	parapet	we	saw	a	big	party	of	Germans	coming	up

from	 the	 second	 trenches.	 They	 were	 out	 of	 the	 communication	 trenches	 and were	coming	across	lots.	There	must	have	been	fifty	of	them,	outnumbering	us

five	or	six	to	one.

We	 were	 out	 of	 bombs,	 Jerry	 had	 lost	 his	 rifle,	 and	 mine	 had	 no	 "ammo."

Blofeld	 fired	 the	 last	 shot	 from	 his	 revolver	 and,	 believe	 me,	 we	 hooked	 it	 for home.

We	had	been	in	their	trenches	just	three	and	a	half	minutes.

Just	as	we	were	going	through	their	wire	a	bomb	exploded	near	and	got	Jerry

in	the	head.	We	dragged	him	in	and	also	the	two	men	that	had	been	clicked	on

the	first	fire.	Jerry	got	Blighty	on	his	wound,	but	was	back	in	two	months.	The

second	 time	 he	 wasn't	 so	 lucky.	 He	 lies	 now	 somewhere	 in	 France	 with	 a wooden	cross	over	his	head.

Did	 that	 muddy	 old	 trench	 look	 good	 when	 we	 tumbled	 in?	 Oh,	 Boy!	 The staff	was	tickled	to	pieces	and	complimented	us	all.	We	were	sent	out	of	the	lines that	night	and	in	billets	got	hot	food,	high-grade	"fags",	a	real	bath,	a	good	stiff rum	ration,	and	letters	from	home.

Next	 morning	 we	 heard	 the	 results	 of	 the	 raid.	 One	 party	 of	 twelve	 never returned.	Besides	that	we	lost	seven	men	killed.	The	German	loss	was	estimated

at	 about	 one	 hundred	 casualties,	 six	 machine	 guns	 and	 several	 dug-outs destroyed,	 and	 one	 mine	 shaft	 put	 out	 of	 business.	 We	 also	 brought	 back documents	of	value	found	by	one	party	in	an	officer's	dug-out.

Blofeld	got	the	military	cross	for	the	night's	work,	and	several	of	the	enlisted men	got	the	D.C.M.

Altogether	it	was	a	successful	raid.	The	best	part	of	it	was	getting	back.





CHAPTER	IV

A	FEW	DAYS'	REST	IN	BILLETS

After	 the	 strafing	 we	 had	 given	 Fritz	 on	 the	 raid,	 he	 behaved	 himself reasonably	well	for	quite	a	while.	It	was	the	first	raid	that	had	been	made	on	that sector	for	a	long	time,	and	we	had	no	doubt	caught	the	Germans	off	their	guard.

Anyhow	for	quite	a	spell	afterwards	they	were	very	"windy"	and	would	send up	 the	 "Very"	 lights	 on	 the	 slightest	 provocation	 and	 start	 the	 "typewriters"	 a-rattling.	Fritz	was	right	on	the	job	with	his	eye	peeled	all	the	time.

In	 fact	 he	 was	 so	 keen	 that	 another	 raid	 that	 was	 attempted	 ten	 days	 later failed	completely	because	of	a	rapidly	concentrated	and	heavy	machine-gun	fire,

and	in	another,	a	day	or	two	later,	our	men	never	got	beyond	our	own	wire	and

had	thirty-eight	casualties	out	of	fifty	men	engaged.

But	 so	 far	 as	 anything	 but	 defensive	 work	 was	 concerned,	 Fritz	 was	 very meek.	He	sent	over	very	few	"minnies"	or	rifle	grenades,	and	there	was	hardly any	shelling	of	the	sector.

Directly	after	the	raid,	we	who	were	in	the	party	had	a	couple	of	days	"on	our own"	at	the	little	village	of	Bully-Grenay,	less	than	three	miles	behind	the	lines.

This	is	directly	opposite	Lens,	the	better	known	town	which	figures	so	often	in

the	dispatches.

Bully-Grenay	had	been	a	place	of	perhaps	one	thousand	people.	It	had	been

fought	 over	 and	 through	 and	 around	 early	 in	 the	 war,	 and	 was	 pretty	 well battered	 up.	 There	 were	 a	 few	 houses	 left	 unhit	 and	 the	 town	 hall	 and	 several shops.	The	rest	of	the	place	was	ruins,	but	about	two	hundred	of	the	inhabitants still	stuck	to	their	old	homes.	For	some	reason	the	Germans	did	not	shell	Bully-Grenay,	that	is,	not	often.	Once	in	a	while	they	would	lob	one	in	just	to	let	the people	know	they	were	not	forgotten.

There	 was	 a	 suspicion	 that	 there	 were	 spies	 in	 the	 town	 and	 that	 that accounted	for	the	Germans	laying	off,	but	whatever	was	the	cause	the	place	was

safer	than	most	villages	so	near	the	lines.

Those	two	days	in	repose	at	Bully-Grenay	were	a	good	deal	of	a	farce.	We were	entirely	"on	our	own",	it	is	true,	no	parade,	no	duty	of	any	kind—but	the quarters—oof!	We	were	billeted	in	the	cellars	of	the	battered-down	houses.	They

weren't	 shell-proof.	 That	 didn't	 matter	 much,	 as	 there	 wasn't	 any	 shelling,	 but there	 might	 have	 been.	 The	 cellars	 were	 dangerous	 enough	 without,	 what	 with tottering	walls	and	overhanging	chunks	of	masonry.

Moreover	 they	 were	 a	 long	 way	 from	 waterproof.	 Imagine	 trying	 to	 find	 a place	to	sleep	in	an	old	ruin	half	full	of	rainwater.	The	dry	places	were	piled	up with	brick	and	mortar,	but	we	managed	to	clean	up	some	half-sheltered	spots	for

"kip"	and	we	lived	through	it.

The	worst	feature	of	these	billets	was	the	rats.	They	were	the	biggest	I	ever

saw,	great,	filthy,	evil-smelling,	grayish-red	fellows,	as	big	as	a	good-sized	cat.

They	would	hop	out	of	the	walls	and	scuttle	across	your	face	with	their	wet,	cold feet,	and	it	was	enough	to	drive	you	insane.	One	chap	in	our	party	had	a	natural horror	 of	 rats,	 and	 he	 nearly	 went	 crazy.	 We	 had	 to	 "kip"	 with	 our	 greatcoats pulled	up	over	our	heads,	and	then	the	beggars	would	go	down	and	nibble	at	our

boots.

The	 first	 day	 somebody	 found	 a	 fox	 terrier,	 evidently	 lost	 and	 probably	 the pet	 of	 some	 officer.	 We	 weren't	 allowed	 to	 carry	 mascots,	 although	 we	 had	 a kitten	that	we	smuggled	along	for	a	long	time.	This	terrier	was	a	well-bred	little fellow,	and	we	grabbed	him.	We	spent	a	good	part	of	both	mornings	digging	out

rats	for	him	and	staged	some	of	the	grandest	fights	ever.

Most	 of	 the	 day	 we	 spent	 at	 a	 little	 estaminet	 across	 the	 way	 from	 our	 so-called	 billets.	 There	 was	 a	 pretty	 mademoiselle	 there	 who	 served	 the	 rotten French	 beer	 and	 vin	 blanc,	 and	 the	 Tommies	 tried	 their	 French	 on	 her.	 They might	 as	 well	 have	 talked	 Choctaw.	 I	 speak	 the	 language	 a	 little	 and	 tried	 to monopolize	the	lady,	and	did,	which	didn't	increase	my	popularity	any.

"I	say,	Yank,"	some	one	would	call,	"don't	be	a	blinkin'	'og.	Give	somebody else	a	chawnce."

Whereupon	I	would	pursue	my	conquest	all	the	more	ardently.	I	was	making

a	large	hit,	as	I	thought,	when	in	came	an	officer.	After	that	I	was	ignored,	to	the huge	delight	of	the	Tommies,	who	joshed	me	unmercifully.	They	discovered	that

my	middle	name	was	Derby,	and	they	christened	me	"Darby	the	Yank."	Darby	I remained	as	long	as	I	was	with	them.

Some	of	the	questions	the	men	asked	about	the	States	were	certainly	funny.

One	chap	asked	what	language	we	spoke	over	here.	I	thought	he	was	spoofing,

but	he	actually	meant	it.	He	thought	we	spoke	something	like	Italian,	he	said.	I couldn't	resist	the	temptation,	and	filled	him	up	with	a	line	of	ghost	stories	about wild	Indians	just	outside	Boston.	I	told	him	I	left	because	of	a	raid	in	which	the redskins	scalped	people	on	Boston	Common.	After	that	he	used	to	pester	the	life

out	of	me	for	Wild	West	yarns	with	the	scenes	laid	in	New	England.

One	chap	was	amazed	and,	I	think,	a	little	incredulous	because	I	didn't	know

a	man	named	Fisk	in	Des	Moines.

We	went	back	to	the	trenches	again	and	were	there	five	days.	I	was	out	one

night	on	barbed	wire	work,	which	is	dangerous	at	any	time,	and	was	especially

so	with	Fritz	in	his	condition	of	jumpy	nerves.	You	have	to	do	most	of	the	work

lying	 on	 your	 back	 in	 the	 mud,	 and	 if	 you	 jingle	 the	 wire,	 Fritz	 traverses	 No Man's	Land	with	his	rapid-firers	with	a	fair	chance	of	bagging	something.

I	also	had	one	night	on	patrol,	which	later	became	my	favorite	game.	I	will

tell	more	about	it	in	another	chapter.

At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 five	 days	 the	 whole	 battalion	 was	 pulled	 out	 for	 rest.	 We marched	 a	 few	 miles	 to	 the	 rear	 and	 came	 to	 the	 village	 of	 Petite-Saens.	 This town	 had	 been	 fought	 through,	 but	 for	 some	 reason	 had	 suffered	 little.	 Few	 of the	houses	had	been	damaged,	and	we	had	real	billets.

My	section,	ten	men	besides	myself,	drew	a	big	attic	in	a	clean	house.	There

was	loads	of	room	and	the	roof	was	tight	and	there	were	no	rats.	It	was	oriental luxury	after	Bully-Grenay	and	the	trenches,	and	for	a	wonder	nobody	had	a	word

of	"grousing"	over	"kipping"	on	the	bare	floor.

The	house	was	occupied	by	a	very	old	peasant	woman	and	a	very	little	girl,

three	years	old,	and	as	pretty	as	a	picture.	The	old	woman	looked	ill	and	sad	and very	 lonesome.	 One	 night	 as	 we	 sat	 in	 her	 kitchen	 drinking	 black	 coffee	 and cognac,	I	persuaded	her	to	tell	her	story.	It	was,	on	the	whole,	rather	a	cruel	thing to	ask,	 I	 am	afraid.	 It	 is	only	 one	 of	 many	such	 that	 I	heard	 over	 there.	 France has,	indeed,	suffered.	I	set	down	here,	as	nearly	as	I	can	translate,	what	the	old woman	said:

"Monsieur,	I	am	very,	very	old	now,	almost	eighty,	but	I	am	a	patriot	and	I love	 my	 France.	 I	 do	 not	 complain	 that	 I	 have	 lost	 everything	 in	 this	 war.	 I	 do not	care	now,	for	I	am	old	and	it	is	for	my	country;	but	there	is	much	sadness	for

me	to	remember,	and	it	is	with	great	bitterness	that	I	think	of	the	pig	Allemand—

beast	that	he	is.

"Two	 years	 ago	 I	 lived	 in	 this	 house,	 happy	 with	 my	 daughter	 and	 her husband	and	the	little	baby,	and	my	husband,	who	worked	in	the	mines.	He	was

too	old	to	fight,	but	when	the	great	war	came	he	tried	to	enlist,	but	they	would not	listen	to	him,	and	he	returned	to	work,	that	the	country	should	not	be	without coal.

"The	 beau-fils	 (son-in-law),	 he	 enlisted	 and	 said	 good-by	 and	 went	 to	 the service.

"By	and	by	the	Boche	come	and	in	a	great	battle	not	far	from	this	very	house the	beau-fils	is	wounded	very	badly	and	is	brought	to	the	house	by	comrades	to

die.

"The	 Boche	 come	 into	 the	 village,	 but	 the	 beau-fils	 is	 too	 weak	 to	 go.	 The Boche	come	into	the	house,	seize	my	daughter,	and	there—they—oh,	monsieur

—the	things	one	may	not	say—and	we	so	helpless.

"Her	father	tries	to	protect	her,	but	he	is	knocked	down.	I	try,	but	they	hold my	feet	over	the	fire	until	the	very	flesh	cooks.	See	for	yourselves	the	burns	on my	feet	still.

"My	husband	dies	from	the	blow	he	gets,	for	he	is	very	old,	over	ninety.	Just then	mon	beau-fils	sees	a	revolver	that	hangs	by	the	side	of	the	German	officer, and	putting	all	his	strength	together	he	leaps	forward	and	grabs	the	revolver.	And there	he	shoots	the	officer—and	my	poor	little	daughter—and	then	he	says	good-by	and	through	the	head	sends	a	bullet.

"The	Germans	did	not	touch	me	but	once	after	that,	and	then	they	knocked

me	 to	 the	 floor	 when	 they	 came	 after	 the	 pig	 officer.	 By	 and	 by	 come	 you English,	and	all	is	well	for	dear	France	once	more;	but	I	am	very	desolate	now.	I am	alone	but	for	the	petite-fille	(granddaughter),	but	I	love	the	English,	for	they save	my	home	and	my	dear	country."

I	heard	a	good	many	stories	of	this	kind	off	and	on,	but	this	particular	one,	I

think,	 brought	 home,	 to	 me	 at	 least,	 the	 general	 beastliness	 of	 the	 Hun	 closer than	ever	before.	We	all	loved	our	little	kiddie	very	much,	and	when	we	saw	the

evidence	of	the	terrible	cruelties	the	poor	old	woman	had	suffered	we	saw	red.

Most	of	us	cried	a	little.	I	think	that	that	one	story	made	each	of	us	that	heard	it	a

mean,	vicious	fighter	for	the	rest	of	our	service.	I	know	it	did	me.

One	 of	 the	 first	 things	 a	 British	 soldier	 learns	 is	 to	 keep	 himself	 clean.	 He can't	 do	 it,	 and	 he's	 as	 filthy	 as	 a	 pig	 all	 the	 time	 he	 is	 in	 the	 trenches,	 but	 he tries.	He	is	always	shaving,	even	under	fire,	and	show	him	running	water	and	he

goes	to	it	like	a	duck.

More	than	once	I	have	shaved	in	a	periscope	mirror	pegged	into	the	side	of	a

trench,	 with	 the	 bullets	 snapping	 overhead,	 and	 rubbed	 my	 face	 with	 wet	 tea leaves	afterward	to	freshen	up.

Back	 in	 billets	 the	 very	 first	 thing	 that	 comes	 off	 is	 the	 big	 clean-up.

Uniforms	are	brushed	up,	and	equipment	put	in	order.	Then	comes	the	bath,	the

most	 thorough	 possible	 under	 the	 conditions.	 After	 that	 comes	 the	 "cootie carnival",	 better	 known	 as	 the	 "shirt	 hunt."	 The	 cootie	 is	 the	 soldier's	 worst enemy.	He's	worse	than	the	Hun.	You	can't	get	rid	of	him	wherever	you	are,	in

the	trenches	or	in	billets,	and	he	sticks	closer	than	a	brother.	The	cootie	is	a	good deal	of	an	acrobat.	His	policy	of	attack	is	to	hang	on	to	the	shirt	and	to	nibble	at the	 occupant.	 Pull	 off	 the	 shirt	 and	 he	 comes	 with	 it.	 Hence	 the	 shirt	 hunt.

Tommy	gets	out	in	the	open	somewhere	so	as	not	to	shed	his	little	companions

indoors—there's	 always	 enough	 there	 anyhow—and	 he	 peels.	 Then	 he

systematically	runs	down	each	seam—the	cootie's	favorite	hiding	place—catches

the	game,	and	ends	his	career	by	cracking	him	between	the	thumb	nails.

For	 some	 obscure	 psychological	 reason,	 Tommy	 seems	 to	 like	 company	 on

one	of	these	hunts.	Perhaps	it	is	because	misery	loves	company,	or	it	may	be	that he	 likes	 to	 compare	 notes	 on	 the	 catch.	 Anyhow,	 it	 is	 a	 common	 thing	 to	 see from	a	dozen	to	twenty	soldiers	with	their	shirts	off,	hunting	cooties.

"Hi	sye,	'Arry,"	you'll	hear	some	one	sing	out.	"Look	'ere.	Strike	me	bloomin'

well	pink	but	this	one	'ere's	got	a	black	stripe	along	'is	back."

Or,	"If	this	don't	look	like	the	one	I	showed	ye	'fore	we	went	into	the	blinkin'

line.	'Ow'd	'e	git	loose?"

And	then,	as	likely	as	not,	a	little	farther	away,	behind	the	officers'	quarters, you'll	hear	one	say:

"I	say,	old	chap,	it's	deucedly	peculiar	I	should	have	so	many	of	the	beastly things	after	putting	on	the	Harrisons	mothaw	sent	in	the	lawst	parcel."

The	cootie	isn't	at	all	fastidious.	He	will	bite	the	British	aristocrat	as	soon	as

anybody	else.	He	finds	his	way	into	all	branches	of	the	service,	and	I	have	even seen	a	dignified	colonel	wiggle	his	shoulders	anxiously.

Some	 of	 the	 cootie	 stories	 have	 become	 classical,	 like	 this	 one	 which	 was told	from	the	North	Sea	to	the	Swiss	border.	It	might	have	happened	at	that.

A	soldier	was	going	over	the	top	when	one	of	his	cootie	friends	bit	him	on

the	calf.	The	soldier	reached	down	and	captured	the	biter.	Just	as	he	stooped,	a shell	whizzed	over	where	his	head	would	have	been	if	he	had	not	gone	after	the

cootie.	Holding	the	captive	between	thumb	and	finger,	he	said:

"Old	feller,	I	cawn't	give	yer	the	Victoria	Cross—but	I	can	put	yer	back."

And	he	did.

The	worst	thing	about	the	cootie	is	that	there	is	no	remedy	for	him.	The	shirt

hunt	is	the	only	effective	way	for	the	soldier	to	get	rid	of	his	bosom	friends.	The various	dopes	and	patent	preparations	guaranteed	as	"good	for	cooties"	are	just that.	They	give	'em	an	appetite.





CHAPTER	V

FEEDING	THE	TOMMIES

Food	is	a	burning	issue	in	the	lives	of	all	of	us.	It	is	the	main	consideration

with	the	soldier.	His	life	is	simplified	to	two	principal	motives, i.e. ,	keeping	alive himself	and	killing	the	other	fellow.	The	question	uppermost	in	his	mind	every

time	and	all	of	the	time,	is,	"When	do	we	eat?"

In	 the	 trenches	 the	 backbone	 of	 Tommy's	 diet	 is	 bully	 beef,	 "Maconochie's Ration",	cheese,	bread	or	biscuit,	jam,	and	tea.	He	may	get	some	of	this	hot	or	he may	eat	it	from	the	tin,	all	depending	upon	how	badly	Fritz	is	behaving.

In	billets	the	diet	is	more	varied.	Here	he	gets	some	fresh	meat,	lots	of	bacon, and	the	bully	and	the	Maconochie's	come	along	in	the	form	of	stew.	Also	there	is fresh	bread	and	some	dried	fruit	and	a	certain	amount	of	sweet	stuff.

It	was	this	matter	of	grub	that	made	my	life	a	burden	in	the	billets	at	Petite-

Saens.	 I	 had	 been	 rather	 proud	 of	 being	 lance	 corporal.	 It	 was,	 to	 me,	 the	 first step	 along	 the	 road	 to	 being	 field	 marshal.	 I	 found,	 however,	 that	 a	 corporal	 is high	enough	to	take	responsibility	and	to	get	bawled	out	for	anything	that	goes

wrong.	 He's	 not	 high	 enough	 to	 command	 any	 consideration	 from	 those	 higher up,	and	he	is	so	close	to	the	men	that	they	take	out	their	grievances	on	him	as	a matter	of	course.	He	is	neither	fish,	flesh,	nor	fowl,	and	his	life	is	a	burden.

I	 had	 the	 job	 of	 issuing	 the	 rations	 of	 our	 platoon,	 and	 it	 nearly	 drove	 me mad.	 Every	 morning	 I	 would	 detail	 a	 couple	 of	 men	 from	 our	 platoon	 to	 be standing	mess	orderlies	for	the	day.	They	would	fetch	the	char	and	bacon	from

the	 field	 kitchen	 in	 the	 morning	 and	 clean	 up	 the	 "dixies"	 after	 breakfast.	 The

"dixie",	by	the	way,	is	an	iron	box	or	pot,	oblong	in	shape,	capacity	about	four	or five	 gallons.	 It	 fits	 into	 the	 field	 kitchen	 and	 is	 used	 for	 roasts,	 stews,	 char,	 or anything	else.	The	cover	serves	to	cook	bacon	in.

Field	kitchens	are	drawn	by	horses	and	follow	the	battalion	everywhere	that

it	is	safe	to	go,	and	to	some	places	where	it	isn't.	Two	men	are	detailed	from	each company	to	cook,	and	there	is	usually	another	man	who	gets	the	sergeants'	mess,

besides	 the	 officers'	 cook,	 who	 does	 not	 as	 a	 rule	 use	 the	 field	 kitchen,	 but prepares	the	food	in	the	house	taken	as	the	officers'	mess.

As	far	as	possible,	the	company	cooks	are	men	who	were	cooks	in	civil	life, but	 not	 always.	 We	 drew	 a	 plumber	 and	 a	 navvy	 (road	 builder)—and	 the	 grub tasted	of	both	trades.	The	way	our	company	worked	the	kitchen	problem	was	to

have	 stew	 for	 two	 platoons	 one	 day	 and	 roast	 dinner	 for	 the	 others,	 and	 then reverse	the	order	next	day,	so	that	we	didn't	have	stew	all	the	time.	There	were not	enough	"dixies"	for	us	all	to	have	stew	the	same	day.

Every	afternoon	I	would	take	my	mess	orderlies	and	go	to	the	quartermaster's

stores	and	get	our	allowance	and	carry	it	back	to	the	billets	in	waterproof	sheets.

Then	the	stuff	that	was	to	be	cooked	in	the	kitchen	went	there,	and	the	bread	and that	 sort	 of	 material	 was	 issued	 direct	 to	 the	 men.	 That	 was	 where	 my	 trouble started.

The	 powers	 that	 were	 had	 an	 uncanny	 knack	 of	 issuing	 an	 odd	 number	 of articles	 to	 go	 among	 an	 even	 number	 of	 men,	 and	 vice	 versa.	 There	 would	 be eleven	loaves	of	bread	to	go	to	a	platoon	of	fifty	men	divided	into	four	sections.

Some	of	the	sections	would	have	ten	men	and	some	twelve	or	thirteen.

The	 British	 Tommy	 is	 a	 scrapper	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 his	 rations.	 He	 reminds me	of	an	English	sparrow.	He's	always	right	in	there	wangling	for	his	own.	He

will	 bully	 and	 browbeat	 if	 he	 can,	 and	 he	 will	 coax	 and	 cajole	 if	 he	 can't.	 It would	be	"Hi	sye,	corporal.	They's	ten	men	in	Number	2	section	and	fourteen	in ourn.	 An'	 blimme	 if	 you	 hain't	 guv	 'em	 four	 loaves,	 same	 as	 ourn.	 Is	 it	 right,	 I arsks	yer?	Is	it?"	Or,

"Lookee!	 Do	 yer	 call	 that	 a	 loaf	 o'	 bread?	 Looks	 like	 the	 A.S.C.	 (Army Service	Corps)	been	using	it	fer	a	piller.	Gimme	another,	will	yer,	corporal?"

When	 it	 comes	 to	 splitting	 seven	 onions	 nine	 ways,	 I	 defy	 any	 one	 to	 keep peace	 in	 the	 family,	 and	 every	 doggoned	 Tommy	 would	 hold	 out	 for	 his	 onion whether	 he	 liked	 'em	 or	 not.	 Same	 way	 with	 a	 bottle	 of	 pickles	 to	 go	 among eleven	 men	 or	 a	 handful	 of	 raisins	 or	 apricots.	 Or	 jam	 or	 butter	 or	 anything, except	 bully	 beef	 or	 Maconochie.	 I	 never	 heard	 any	 one	 "argue	 the	 toss"	 on either	of	those	commodities.

Bully	is	high-grade	corned	beef	in	cans	and	is	O.K.	if	you	like	it,	but	it	does

get	tiresome.

Maconochie	 ration	 is	 put	 up	 a	 pound	 to	 the	 can	 and	 bears	 a	 label	 which assures	 the	 consumer	 that	 it	 is	 a	 scientifically	 prepared,	 well-balanced	 ration.

Maybe	 so.	 It	 is	 my	 personal	 opinion	 that	 the	 inventor	 brought	 to	 his	 task	 an

imperfect	 knowledge	 of	 cookery	 and	 a	 perverted	 imagination.	 Open	 a	 can	 of Maconochie	and	you	find	a	gooey	gob	of	grease,	like	rancid	lard.	Investigate	and you	find	chunks	of	carrot	and	other	unidentifiable	material,	and	now	and	then	a

bit	of	mysterious	meat.	The	first	man	who	ate	an	oyster	had	courage,	but	the	last man	 who	 ate	 Maconochie's	 unheated	 had	 more.	 Tommy	 regards	 it	 as	 a	 very inferior	grade	of	garbage.	The	label	notwithstanding,	he's	right.

Many	people	have	asked	me	what	to	send	our	soldiers	in	the	line	of	food.	I'd

say	stick	to	sweets.	Cookies	of	any	durable	kind—I	mean	that	will	stand	chance

moisture—the	sweeter	the	better,	and	if	possible	those	containing	raisins	or	dried fruit.	 Figs,	 dates,	 etc.,	 are	 good.	 And,	 of	 course,	 chocolate.	 Personally,	 I	 never did	have	enough	chocolate.	Candy	is	acceptable,	if	it	is	of	the	sort	to	stand	more or	less	rough	usage	which	it	may	get	before	it	reaches	the	soldier.	Chewing	gum

is	 always	 received	 gladly.	 The	 army	 issue	 of	 sweets	 is	 limited	 pretty	 much	 to jam,	which	gets	to	taste	all	alike.

It	 is	 pathetic	 to	 see	 some	 of	 the	 messes	 Tommy	 gets	 together	 to	 fill	 his craving	for	dessert.	The	favorite	is	a	slum	composed	of	biscuit,	water,	condensed milk,	raisins,	and	chocolate.	If	some	of	you	folks	at	home	would	get	one	look	at that	 concoction,	 let	 alone	 tasting	 it,	 you	 would	 dash	 out	 and	 spend	 your	 last dollar	for	a	package	to	send	to	some	lad	"over	there."

Cooking	Under	Difficulties.

After	the	excitement	of	dodging	shells	and	bullets	in	the	front	trenches,	life

in	 billets	 seems	 dull.	 Tommy	 has	 too	 much	 time	 to	 get	 into	 mischief.	 It	 was	 at Petite-Saens	that	I	first	saw	the	Divisional	Folies.	This	was	a	vaudeville	show	by ten	 men	 who	 had	 been	 actors	 in	 civil	 life,	 and	 who	 were	 detailed	 to	 amuse	 the soldiers.	 They	 charged	 a	 small	 admission	 fee	 and	 the	 profit	 went	 to	 the	 Red Cross.

There	 ought	 to	 be	 more	 recreation	 for	 the	 soldiers	 of	 all	 armies.	 The Y.M.C.A.	is	to	take	care	of	that	with	our	boys.

By	the	way,	we	had	a	Y.M.C.A.	hut	at	Petite-Saens,	and	I	cannot	say	enough

for	this	great	work.	No	one	who	has	not	been	there	can	know	what	a	blessing	it

is	to	be	able	to	go	into	a	clean,	warm,	dry	place	and	sit	down	to	reading	or	games and	to	hear	good	music.	Personally	I	am	a	little	bit	sorry	that	the	secretaries	are to	be	in	khaki.	They	weren't	when	I	left.	And	it	sure	did	seem	good	to	see	a	man in	civilian's	clothes.	You	get	after	a	while	so	you	hate	the	sight	of	a	uniform.

Another	 thing	 about	 the	 Y.M.C.A.	 I	 could	 wish	 that	 they	 would	 have	 more women	in	the	huts.	Not	frilly,	frivolous	society	girls,	but	women	from	thirty-five to	 fifty.	 A	 soldier	 likes	 kisses	 as	 well	 as	 the	 next.	 And	 he	 takes	 them	 when	 he finds	 them.	 And	 he	 finds	 too	 many.	 But	 what	 he	 really	 wants,	 though,	 is	 the chance	to	sit	down	and	tell	his	troubles	to	some	nice,	sympathetic	woman	who	is

old	enough	to	be	level-headed.

Nearly	 every	 soldier	 reverts	 more	 or	 less	 to	 a	 boyish	 point	 of	 view.	 He hankers	 for	 somebody	 to	 mother	 him.	 I	 should	 be	 glad	 to	 see	 many	 women	 of that	type	in	the	Y.M.C.A.	work.	It	is	one	of	the	great	needs	of	our	army	that	the boys	should	be	amused	and	kept	clean	mentally	and	morally.	I	don't	believe	there is	any	organization	better	qualified	to	do	this	than	the	Y.M.C.A.

Most	of	our	chaps	spent	their	time	"on	their	own"	either	in	the	Y.M.C.A.	hut or	 in	 the	 estaminets	 while	 we	 were	 in	 Petite-Saens.	 Our	 stop	 there	 was	 hardly typical	 of	 the	 rest	 in	 billets.	 Usually	 "rest"	 means	 that	 you	 are	 set	 to	 mending roads	or	some	such	fatigue	duty.	At	Petite-Saens,	however,	we	had	it	"cushy."

The	routine	was	about	like	this:	Up	at	6:30,	we	fell	in	for	three-quarters	of	an hour	 physical	 drill	 or	 bayonet	 practice.	 Breakfast.	 Inspection	 of	 ammo	 and	 gas masks.	One	hour	drill.	After	that,	"on	our	own",	with	nothing	to	do	but	smoke, read,	and	gamble.

Tommy	is	a	great	smoker.	He	gets	a	fag	issue	from	the	government,	if	he	is

lucky,	of	two	packets	or	twenty	a	week.	This	lasts	him	with	care	about	two	days.

After	that	he	goes	smokeless	unless	he	has	friends	at	home	to	send	him	a	supply.

I	had	friends	in	London	who	sent	me	about	five	hundred	fags	a	week,	and	I	was

consequently	popular	while	they	lasted.	This	took	off	some	of	the	curse	of	being a	lance	corporal.

Tommy	has	his	favorite	in	"fags"	like	anybody	else.	He	likes	above	all	Wild Woodbines.	This	cigarette	is	composed	of	glue,	cheap	paper,	and	a	poor	quality

of	hay.	Next	in	his	affection	comes	Goldflakes—pretty	near	as	bad.

People	 over	 here	 who	 have	 boys	 at	 the	 front	 mustn't	 forget	 the	 cigarette supply.	Send	them	along	early	and	often.	There'll	never	be	too	many.	Smoking	is

one	 of	 the	 soldier's	 few	 comforts.	 Two	 bits'	 worth	 of	 makin's	 a	 week	 will	 help one	lad	make	life	endurable.	It's	cheap	at	the	price.	Come	through	for	the	smoke fund	whenever	you	get	the	chance.

Café	life	among	us	at	Petite-Saens	was	mostly	drinking	and	gambling.	That

is	not	half	as	bad	as	it	sounds.	The	drinking	was	mostly	confined	to	the	slushy French	beer	and	vin	blanc	and	citron.	Whiskey	and	absinthe	were	barred.

The	gambling	was	on	a	small	scale,	necessarily,	the	British	soldier	not	being

at	 any	 time	 a	 bloated	 plutocrat.	 At	 the	 same	 time	 the	 games	 were	 continuous.

"House"	was	the	most	popular.	This	is	a	game	similar	to	the	"lotto"	we	used	to play	 as	 children.	 The	 backers	 distribute	 cards	 having	 fifteen	 numbers,	 forming what	 they	 call	 a	 school.	 Then	 numbered	 cardboard	 squares	 are	 drawn	 from	 a bag,	the	numbers	being	called	out.	When	a	number	comes	out	which	appears	on

your	card,	you	cover	it	with	a	bit	of	match.	If	you	get	all	your	numbers	covered, you	call	out	"house",	winning	the	pot.	If	there	are	ten	people	in	at	a	franc	a	head, the	banker	holds	out	two	francs,	and	the	winner	gets	eight.

It	is	really	quite	exciting,	as	you	may	get	all	but	one	number	covered	and	be

rooting	for	a	certain	number	to	come.	Usually	when	you	get	as	close	as	that	and

sweat	 over	 a	 number	 for	 ten	 minutes,	 somebody	 else	 gets	 his	 first.	 Corporal Wells	 described	 the	 game	 as	 one	 where	 the	 winner	 "'ollers	 'ouse	 and	 the	 rest

'ollers	'ell!"

Some	of	the	nicknames	for	the	different	numbers	remind	one	of	the	slang	of

the	crap	shooter.	For	instance,	"Kelly's	eye"	means	one.	"Clickety	click"	is	sixty-six.	"Top	of	the	house"	is	ninety.	Other	games	are	"crown	and	anchor",	which	is a	 dice	 game,	 and	 "pontoon",	 which	 is	 a	 card	 game	 similar	 to	 "twenty-one"	 or

"seven	 and	 a	 half."	 Most	 of	 these	 are	 mildly	 discouraged	 by	 the	 authorities,

"house"	being	the	exception.	But	in	any	 estaminet	in	a	billet	town	you'll	find	one or	all	of	them	in	progress	all	the	time.	The	winner	usually	spends	his	winnings

for	beer,	so	the	money	all	goes	the	same	way,	game	or	no	game.

When	 there	 are	 no	 games	 on,	 there	 is	 usually	 a	 sing-song	 going.	 We	 had	 a merry	young	nuisance	in	our	platoon	named	Rolfe,	who	had	a	voice	like	a	frog

and	who	used	to	insist	upon	singing	on	all	occasions.	Rolfie	would	climb	on	the

table	in	the	 estaminet	and	sing	numerous	unprintable	verses	of	his	own,	entitled

"Oh,	What	a	Merry	Plyce	is	Hengland."	The	only	redeeming	feature	of	this	song was	the	chorus,	which	everybody	would	roar	out	and	which	went	like	this:

Cheer,	ye	beggars,	cheer!

Britannia	rules	the	wave!

'Ard	times,	short	times

Never'll	come	agyne.

Shoutin'	out	at	th'	top	o'	yer	lungs:

Damn	the	German	army!

Oh,	wot	a	lovely	plyce	is	Hengland!

Our	ten	days	 en	repos	at	Petite-Saens	came	to	an	end	all	too	soon.

On	the	last	day	we	lined	up	for	our	official	"bawth."

Petite-Saens	was	a	coal-mining	town.	The	mines	were	still	operated,	but	only

at	night—this	to	avoid	shelling	from	the	Boche	long-distance	artillery,	which	are fully	capable	of	sending	shells	and	hitting	the	mark	at	eighteen	miles.	The	water system	 of	 the	 town	 depended	 upon	 the	 pumping	 apparatus	 of	 the	 mines.	 Every morning	early,	before	the	pressure	was	off,	all	hands	would	turn	out	for	a	general

"sluicing"	 under	 the	 hydrants.	 We	 were	 as	 clean	 as	 could	 be	 and	 fairly	 free	 of

"cooties"	at	the	end	of	a	week,	but	official	red	tape	demanded	that	we	go	through an	authorized	scouring.

On	the	last	day	we	lined	up	for	this	at	dawn	before	an	old	warehouse	which

had	 been	 fitted	 with	 crude	 showers.	 We	 were	 turned	 in	 twenty	 in	 a	 batch	 and were	given	four	minutes	to	soap	ourselves	all	over	and	rinse	off.	I	was	in	the	last lot	and	had	just	lathered	up	good	and	plenty	when	the	water	went	dead.	If	you

want	 to	 reach	 the	 acme	 of	 stickiness,	 try	 this	 stunt.	 I	 felt	 like	 the	 inside	 of	 a mucilage	bottle	for	a	week.

After	the	official	purification	we	were	given	clean	underwear.	And	then	there

was	 a	 howl.	 The	 fresh	 underthings	 had	 been	 boiled	 and	 sterilized,	 but	 the immortal	cootie	had	come	through	unscathed	and	in	all	its	vigor.	Corporal	Wells

raised	a	pathetic	wail:

"Blimme	eyes,	mytie!	I	got	more'n	two	'undred	now	an'	this	supposed	to	be	a bloomin'	clean	shirt!	Why,	the	blinkin'	thing's	as	lousy	as	a	cookoo	now,	an	me

just	a-gittin'	rid	o'	the	bloomin'	chats	on	me	old	un.	Strike	me	pink	if	it	hain't	a bleedin'	crime!	Some	one	ought	to	write	to	John	Bull	abaht	it!"

John	Bull	is	the	English	paper	of	that	name	published	by	Horatio	Bottomley, which	 makes	 a	 specialty	 of	 publishing	 complaints	 from	 soldiers	 and	 generally criticising	the	conduct	of	army	affairs.

Well,	we	got	through	the	bath	and	the	next	day	were	on	our	way.	This	time	it

was	 up	 the	 line	 to	 another	 sector.	 My	 one	 taste	 of	 trench	 action	 had	 made	 me keen	for	more	excitement,	and	in	spite	of	the	comfortable	time	at	Petite-Saens,	I was	 glad	 to	 go.	 I	 was	 yet	 to	 know	 the	 real	 horrors	 and	 hardships	 of	 modern

warfare.	 There	 were	 many	 days	 in	 those	 to	 come	 when	 I	 looked	 back	 upon Petite-Saens	as	a	sort	of	heaven.





CHAPTER	VI

HIKING	TO	VIMY	RIDGE

We	 left	 Petite-Saens	 about	 nine	 o'clock	 Friday	 night	 and	 commenced	 our march	 for	 what	 we	 were	 told	 would	 be	 a	 short	 hike.	 It	 was	 pretty	 warm	 and muggy.	 There	 was	 a	 thin,	 low-lying	 mist	 over	 everything,	 but	 clear	 enough above,	and	there	was	a	kind	of	poor	moonlight.	There	was	a	good	deal	of	delay

in	 getting	 away,	 and	 we	 had	 begun	 to	 sweat	 before	 we	 started,	 as	 we	 were equipped	as	usual	with	about	eighty	pounds'	weight	on	the	back	and	shoulders.

That	eighty	pounds	is	theoretical	weight.

As	 a	 matter	 of	 practice	 the	 pack	 nearly	 always	 runs	 ten	 and	 even	 twenty pounds	 over	 the	 official	 equipment,	 as	 Tommy	 is	 a	 great	 little	 accumulator	 of junk.	I	had	acquired	the	souvenir	craze	early	in	the	game,	and	was	toting	excess baggage	 in	 the	 form	 of	 a	 Boche	 helmet,	 a	 mess	 of	 shell	 noses,	 and	 a	 smashed German	automatic.	All	this	ran	to	weight.

I	carried	a	lot	of	this	kind	of	stuff	all	the	time	I	was	in	the	service,	and	was constantly	thinning	out	my	collection	or	adding	to	it.

When	 you	 consider	 that	 a	 soldier	 has	 to	 carry	 everything	 he	 owns	 on	 his person,	 you'd	 say	 that	 he	 would	 want	 to	 fly	 light;	 but	 he	 doesn't.	 And	 that reminds	me,	before	I	forget	it,	I	want	to	say	something	about	sending	boxes	over there.

It	 is	 the	 policy	 of	 the	 British,	 and,	 I	 suppose,	 will	 be	 of	 the	 Americans,	 to move	the	troops	about	a	good	deal.	This	is	done	so	that	no	one	unit	will	become

too	much	at	home	in	any	one	line	of	trenches	and	so	get	careless.	This	moving

about	involves	a	good	deal	of	hiking.

Now	 if	 some	 chap	 happens	 to	 get	 a	 twenty-pound	 box	 of	 good	 things	 just before	he	is	shifted,	he's	going	to	be	in	an	embarrassing	position.	He'll	have	to give	it	away	or	leave	it.	So—send	the	boxes	two	or	three	pounds	at	a	time,	and

often.

But	to	get	back	to	Petite-Saens.	We	commenced	our	hike	as	it	is	was	getting

dark.	 As	 we	 swung	 out	 along	 the	 once	 good	 but	 now	 badly	 furrowed	 French

road,	we	could	see	the	Very	lights	beginning	to	go	up	far	off	to	the	left,	showing where	the	lines	were.	We	could	distinguish	between	our	own	star	lights	and	the

German	by	the	intensity	of	the	flare,	theirs	being	much	superior	to	ours,	so	much so	that	they	send	them	up	from	the	second-line	trenches.

The	sound	of	the	guns	became	more	distant	as	we	swung	away	to	the	south

and	louder	again	as	the	road	twisted	back	toward	the	front.

We	 began	 to	 sing	 the	 usual	 songs	 of	 the	 march	 and	 I	 noticed	 that	 the American	 ragtime	 was	 more	 popular	 among	 the	 boys	 than	 their	 own	 music.

"Dixie"	frequently	figured	in	these	songs.

It	 is	 always	 a	 good	 deal	 easier	 to	 march	 when	 the	 men	 sing,	 as	 it	 helps	 to keep	 time	 and	 puts	 pep	 into	 a	 column	 and	 makes	 the	 packs	 seem	 lighter.	 The officers	see	to	it	that	the	mouth	organs	get	tuned	up	the	minute	a	hike	begins.

At	the	end	of	each	hour	we	came	to	a	halt	for	the	regulation	ten	minutes'	rest.

Troops	 in	 heavy	 marching	 order	 move	 very	 slowly,	 even	 with	 the	 music—and the	hours	drag.	The	ten	minutes'	rest	though	goes	like	a	flash.	The	men	keep	an

eye	on	the	watches	and	"wangle"	for	the	last	second.

We	 passed	 through	 two	 ruined	 villages	 with	 the	 battered	 walls	 sticking	 up like	 broken	 teeth	 and	 the	 gray	 moonlight	 shining	 through	 empty	 holes	 that	 had been	windows.	The	people	were	gone	from	these	places,	but	a	dog	howled	over

yonder.	 Several	 times	 we	 passed	 batteries	 of	 French	 artillery,	 and	 jokes	 and laughter	came	out	of	the	half	darkness.

Topping	 a	 little	 rise,	 the	 moon	 came	 out	 bright,	 and	 away	 ahead	 the	 silver ribbon	of	the	Souchez	gleamed	for	an	instant;	the	bare	poles	that	once	had	been

Bouvigny	 Wood	 were	 behind	 us,	 and	 to	 the	 right,	 to	 the	 left,	 a	 pulverized	 ruin where	houses	had	stood.	Blofeld	told	me	this	was	what	was	left	of	the	village	of Abalaine,	 which	 had	 been	 demolished	 some	 time	 before	 when	 the	 French	 held the	sector.

At	this	point	guides	came	out	and	met	us	to	conduct	us	to	the	trenches.	The

order	went	down	the	line	to	fall	in,	single	file,	keeping	touch,	no	smoking	and	no talking,	and	I	supposed	we	were	about	to	enter	a	communication	trench.	But	no.

We	swung	on	to	a	"duck	walk."	This	is	a	slatted	wooden	walk	built	to	prevent	as much	as	possible	sinking	into	the	mud.	The	ground	was	very	soft	here.

I	 never	 did	 know	 why	 there	 was	 no	 communication	 trench	 unless	 it	 was

because	the	ground	was	so	full	of	moisture.	But	whatever	the	reason,	there	was none,	and	we	were	right	out	in	the	open	on	the	duck	walk.	The	order	for	no	talk

seemed	silly	as	we	clattered	along	the	boards,	making	a	noise	like	a	four-horse

team	on	a	covered	bridge.

I	 immediately	 wondered	 whether	 we	 were	 near	 enough	 for	 the	 Boches	 to

hear.	I	wasn't	in	doubt	long,	for	they	began	to	send	over	the	"Berthas"	in	flocks.

The	"Bertha"	is	an	uncommonly	ugly	breed	of	nine-inch	shell	loaded	with	H.E.

It	comes	sailing	over	with	a	querulous	"squeeeeeee",	and	explodes	with	an	ear-splitting	crash	and	a	burst	of	murky,	dull-red	flame.

If	 it	 hits	 you	 fair,	 you	 disappear.	 At	 a	 little	 distance	 you	 are	 ripped	 to fragments,	and	a	little	farther	off	you	get	a	case	of	shell-shock.	Just	at	the	edge of	the	destructive	area	the	wind	of	the	explosion	whistles	by	your	ears,	and	then sucks	back	more	slowly.

The	 Boches	 had	 the	 range	 of	 that	 duck	 walk,	 and	 we	 began	 to	 run.	 Every now	and	then	they	would	drop	one	near	the	walk,	and	from	four	to	ten	casualties

would	 go	 down.	 There	 was	 no	 stopping	 for	 the	 wounded.	 They	 lay	 where	 they fell.	We	kept	on	the	run,	sometimes	on	the	duck	walk,	sometimes	in	the	mud,	for

three	miles.	I	had	reached	the	limit	of	my	endurance	when	we	came	to	a	halt	and

rested	for	a	little	while	at	the	foot	of	a	slight	incline.	This	was	the	"Pimple",	so called	on	account	of	its	rounded	crest.

The	Pimple	forms	a	part	of	the	well-known	Vimy	Ridge—is	a	semi-detached

extension	of	it—and	lies	between	it	and	the	Souchez	sector.	After	a	rest	here	we got	into	the	trenches	skirting	the	Pimple	and	soon	came	out	on	the	Quarries.	This was	 a	 bowl-like	 depression	 formed	 by	 an	 old	 quarry.	 The	 place	 gave	 a	 natural protection	 and	 all	 around	 the	 edge	 were	 dug-outs	 which	 had	 been	 built	 by	 the French,	running	back	into	the	hill,	some	of	them	more	than	a	hundred	feet.

In	the	darkness	we	could	see	braziers	glowing	softly	red	at	the	mouth	of	each

burrow.	 There	 was	 a	 cheerful,	 mouth-watering	 smell	 of	 cookery	 on	 the	 air,	 a garlicky	smell,	with	now	and	then	a	whiff	of	spicy	wood	smoke.

We	were	hungry	and	thirsty,	as	well	as	tired,	and	shed	our	packs	at	the	dug-

outs	 assigned	 us	 and	 went	 at	 the	 grub	 and	 the	 char	 offered	 us	 by	 the	 men	 we were	relieving,	the	Northumberland	Fusiliers.

The	dug-outs	here	in	the	Quarries	were	the	worst	I	saw	in	France.	They	were

reasonably	 dry	 and	 roomy,	 but	 they	 had	 no	 ventilation	 except	 the	 tunnel

entrance,	 and	 going	 back	 so	 far	 the	 air	 inside	 became	 simply	 stifling	 in	 a	 very short	time.

I	 took	 one	 inhale	 of	 the	 interior	 atmosphere	 and	 decided	 right	 there	 that	 I would	bivouac	in	the	open.	It	was	just	getting	down	to	"kip"	when	a	sentry	came up	and	said	I	would	have	to	get	inside.	It	seemed	that	Fritz	had	the	range	of	the Quarries	to	an	inch	and	was	in	the	habit	of	sending	over	"minnies"	at	intervals just	to	let	us	know	he	wasn't	asleep.

I	 had	 got	 settled	 down	 comfortably	 and	 was	 dozing	 off	 when	 there	 came	 a call	for	C	company.	I	got	the	men	from	my	platoon	out	as	quickly	as	possible,

and	in	half	an	hour	we	were	in	the	trenches.

Number	10	platoon	was	assigned	to	the	center	sector,	Number	11	to	the	left

sector,	and	Number	12	to	the	right	sector.	Number	9	remained	behind	in	supports

in	the	Quarries.

Now	 when	 I	 speak	 of	 these	 various	 sectors,	 I	 mean	 that	 at	 this	 point	 there was	 no	 continuous	 line	 of	 front	 trenches,	 only	 isolated	 stretches	 of	 trench separated	 by	 intervals	 of	 from	 two	 hundred	 to	 three	 hundred	 yards	 of	 open ground.	There	were	no	dug-outs.	It	was	impossible	to	leave	these	trenches	except under	cover	of	darkness—or	to	get	to	them	or	to	get	up	rations.	They	were	awful

holes.	Any	raid	by	the	Germans	in	large	numbers	at	this	time	would	have	wiped

us	out,	as	there	was	no	means	of	retreating	or	getting	up	reinforcements.

The	Tommies	called	the	trenches	Grouse	Spots.	It	was	a	good	name.	We	got

into	 them	 in	 the	 dense	 darkness	 of	 just	 before	 dawn.	 The	 division	 we	 relieved gave	us	hardly	any	instruction,	but	beat	it	on	the	hot	foot,	glad	to	get	away	and anxious	 to	 go	 before	 sun-up.	 As	 we	 settled	 down	 in	 our	 cosey	 danger	 spots	 I heard	Rolfie,	the	frog-voiced	baritone,	humming	one	of	his	favorite	coster	songs: Oh,	why	did	I	leave	my	little	back	room	in	old	Bloomsbury?

Where	I	could	live	for	a	pound	a	week	in	luxury.

I	wanted	to	live	higher

So	I	married	Marier,

Out	of	the	frying	pan	into	the	bloomin'	fire.

And	he	meant	every	word	of	it.

In	our	new	positions	in	the	Grouse	Spots	the	orders	were	to	patrol	the	open

ground	between	at	least	four	times	a	night.	That	first	night	there	was	one	more

patrol	 necessary	 before	 daylight.	 Tired	 as	 I	 was,	 I	 volunteered	 for	 it.	 I	 had	 had one	patrol	before,	opposite	Bully-Grenay,	and	thought	I	liked	the	game.

I	went	over	with	one	man,	a	fellow	named	Bellinger.	We	got	out	and	started

to	 crawl.	 All	 we	 knew	 was	 that	 the	 left	 sector	 was	 two	 hundred	 yards	 away.

Machine-gun	bullets	were	squealing	and	snapping	overhead	pretty	continuously,

and	we	had	to	hug	the	dirt.	It	is	surprising	to	see	how	flat	a	man	can	keep	and

still	 get	 along	 at	 a	 good	 rate	 of	 speed.	 We	 kept	 straight	 away	 to	 the	 left	 and presently	got	into	wire.	And	then	we	heard	German	voices.	Ow!	I	went	cold	all

over.

Then	 some	 "Very"	 lights	 went	 up	 and	 I	 saw	 the	 Boche	 parapet	 not	 twenty feet	away.	Worst	of	all	there	was	a	little	lane	through	their	wire	at	that	point,	and there	 would	 be,	 no	 doubt,	 a	 sap	 head	 or	 a	 listening	 post	 near.	 I	 tried	 to	 lie	 still and	burrow	into	the	dirt	at	the	same	time.	Nothing	happened.	Presently	the	lights died,	and	Bellinger	gave	me	a	poke	in	the	ribs.	We	started	to	crawfish.	Why	we

weren't	seen	I	don't	know,	but	we	had	gone	all	of	one	hundred	feet	before	they

spotted	 us.	 Fortunately	 we	 were	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 a	 shallow	 shell	 hole	 when	 the sentry	 caught	 our	 movements	 and	 Fritz	 cut	 loose	 with	 the	 "typewriters."	 We rolled	 in.	 A	 perfect	 torrent	 of	 bullets	 ripped	 up	 the	 dirt	 and	 cascaded	 us	 with gravel	 and	 mud.	 The	 noise	 of	 the	 bullets	 "crackling"	 a	 yard	 above	 us	 was deafening.

The	 fusillade	 stopped	 after	 a	 bit.	 I	 was	 all	 for	 getting	 out	 and	 away immediately.	 Bellinger	 wanted	 to	 wait	 a	 while.	 We	 argued	 for	 as	 much	 as	 five minutes,	I	should	think,	and	then	the	lights	having	gone	out,	I	took	matters	in	my own	hands	and	we	went	away	from	there.	Another	piece	of	luck!

We	weren't	more	than	a	minute	on	our	way	when	a	pair	of	bombs	went	off

about	over	the	shell	hole.	Evidently	some	bold	Heinie	had	chucked	them	over	to

make	sure	of	the	job	in	case	the	machines	hadn't.	It	was	a	close	pinch—two	close pinches.	 I	 was	 in	 places	 afterwards	 where	 there	 was	 more	 action	 and	 more danger,	 but,	 looking	 back,	 I	 don't	 think	 I	 was	 ever	 sicker	 or	 scareder.	 I	 would have	been	easy	meat	if	they	had	rushed	us.

We	 made	 our	 way	 back	 slowly,	 and	 eventually	 caught	 the	 gleam	 of	 steel helmets.	They	were	British.	We	had	stumbled	upon	our	left	sector.	We	found	out

then	that	the	line	curved	and	that	instead	of	the	left	sector	being	directly	to	the left	 of	 ours—the	 center—it	 was	 to	 the	 left	 and	 to	 the	 rear.	 Also	 there	 was	 a telephone	 wire	 running	 from	 one	 to	 the	 other.	 We	 reported	 and	 made	 our	 way

back	to	the	center	in	about	five	minutes	by	feeling	along	the	wire.	That	was	our method	afterwards,	and	the	patrol	was	cushy	for	us.





CHAPTER	VII

FASCINATION	OF	PATROL	WORK

I	 want	 to	 say	 a	 word	 right	 here	 about	 patrol	 work	 in	 general,	 because	 for some	reason	it	fascinated	me	and	was	my	favorite	game.

If	you	should	be	fortunate—or	unfortunate	enough,	as	the	case	might	be—to

be	 squatting	 in	 a	 front-line	 trench	 this	 fine	 morning	 and	 looking	 through	 a periscope,	you	wouldn't	see	much.	Just	over	the	top,	not	more	than	twenty	feet

away,	 would	 be	 your	 barbed-wire	 entanglements,	 a	 thick	 network	 of	 wire stretched	 on	 iron	 posts	 nearly	 waist	 high,	 and	 perhaps	 twelve	 or	 fifteen	 feet across.	Then	there	would	be	an	intervening	stretch	of	from	fifty	to	one	hundred

fifty	yards	of	No	Man's	Land,	a	tortured,	torn	expanse	of	muddy	soil,	pitted	with shell	craters,	and,	over	beyond,	the	German	wire	and	his	parapet.

There	would	be	nothing	alive	visible.	There	would	probably	be	a	few	corpses

lying	 about	 or	 hanging	 in	 the	 wire.	 Everything	 would	 be	 still	 except	 for	 the flutter	 of	 some	 rag	 of	 a	 dead	 man's	 uniform.	 Perhaps	 not	 that.	 Daylight movements	 in	 No	 Man's	 Land	 are	 somehow	 disconcerting.	 Once	 I	 was	 in	 a trench	where	a	leg—a	booted	German	leg,	stuck	up	stark	and	stiff	out	of	the	mud

not	twenty	yards	in	front.	Some	idiotic	joker	on	patrol	hung	a	helmet	on	the	foot, and	all	the	next	day	that	helmet	dangled	and	swung	in	the	breeze.	It	irritated	the periscope	watchers,	and	the	next	night	it	was	taken	down.

Ordinarily,	however,	there	is	little	movement	between	the	wires,	nor	behind

them.	And	yet	you	know	that	over	yonder	there	are	thousands	of	men	lurking	in

the	trenches	and	shelters.

After	 dark	 these	 men,	 or	 some	 of	 them,	 crawl	 out	 like	 hunted	 animals	 and prowl	in	the	black	mystery	of	No	Man's	Land.	They	are	the	patrol.

The	patrol	goes	out	armed	and	equipped	lightly.	He	has	to	move	softly	and	at

times	 very	 quickly.	 It	 is	 his	 duty	 to	 get	 as	 close	 to	 the	 enemy	 lines	 as	 possible and	find	out	if	they	are	repairing	their	wire	or	if	any	of	their	parties	are	out,	and to	 get	 back	 word	 to	 the	 machine	 gunners,	 who	 immediately	 cut	 loose	 on	 the indicated	spot.

Sometimes	 he	 lies	 with	 his	 head	 to	 the	 ground	 over	 some	 suspected	 area, straining	 his	 ears	 for	 the	 faint	 "scrape,	 scrape"	 that	 means	 a	 German	 mining party	 is	 down	 there,	 getting	 ready	 to	 plant	 a	 ton	 or	 so	 of	 high	 explosive,	 or,	 it may	be,	is	preparing	to	touch	it	off	at	that	very	moment.

Always	 the	 patrol	 is	 supposed	 to	 avoid	 encounter	 with	 enemy	 patrols.	 He carries	two	or	three	Mills	bombs	and	a	pistol,	but	not	for	use	except	in	extreme emergency.	Also	a	persuader	stick	or	a	trench	knife,	which	he	may	use	if	he	is

near	enough	to	do	it	silently.

The	patrol	stares	constantly	through	the	dark	and	gets	so	he	can	see	almost	as

well	as	a	cat.	He	must	avoid	being	seen.	When	a	Very	light	goes	up,	he	lies	still.

If	 he	 happens	 to	 be	 standing,	 he	 stands	 still.	 Unless	 the	 light	 is	 behind	 him	 so that	he	is	silhouetted,	he	is	invisible	to	the	enemy.

Approaching	 a	 corpse,	 the	 patrol	 lies	 quiet	 and	 watches	 it	 for	 several minutes,	 unless	 it	 is	 one	 he	 has	 seen	 before	 and	 is	 acquainted	 with.	 Because sometimes	 the	 man	 isn't	 dead,	 but	 a	 perfectly	 live	 Boche	 patrol	 lying	 "doggo."

You	can't	be	too	careful.

If	 you	 happen	 to	 be	 pussyfooting	 forward	 erect	 and	 encounter	 a	 German patrol,	it	is	policy	to	scuttle	back	unless	you	are	near	enough	to	get	in	one	good lick	 with	 the	 persuader.	 He	 will	 retreat	 slowly	 himself,	 and	 you	 mustn't	 follow him.	Because:	The	British	patrol	usually	goes	out	singly	or	at	the	most	in	pairs	or threes.

The	Germans,	on	the	other	hand,	hunt	in	parties.	One	man	leads.	Two	others

follow	to	the	rear,	one	to	each	side.	And	then	two	more,	and	two	more,	so	that

they	form	a	V,	like	a	flock	of	geese.	Now	if	you	follow	up	the	lead	man	when	he

retreats,	 you	 are	 baited	 into	 a	 trap	 and	 find	 yourself	 surrounded,	 smothered	 by superior	 numbers,	 and	 taken	 prisoner.	 Then	 back	 to	 the	 Boche	 trench,	 where exceedingly	unpleasant	things	are	apt	to	happen.

It	is,	in	fact,	most	unwholesome	for	a	British	patrol	to	be	captured.	I	recall	a case	in	point	which	I	witnessed	and	which	is	far	enough	in	the	past	so	that	it	can be	 told.	 It	 occurred,	 not	 at	 Vimy	 Ridge,	 but	 further	 down	 the	 line,	 nearer	 the Somme.

I	 was	 out	 one	 night	 with	 another	 man,	 prowling	 in	 the	 dark,	 when	 I

encountered	a	Canadian	sergeant	who	was	alone.	There	was	a	Canadian	battalion

holding	the	next	trench	to	us,	and	another	farther	down.	He	was	from	the	farther

one.	 We	 lay	 in	 the	 mud	 and	 compared	 notes.	 Once,	 when	 a	 light	 floated	 down near	us,	I	saw	his	face,	and	he	was	a	man	I	knew,	though	not	by	name.

After	a	while	we	separated,	and	he	went	back,	as	he	was	considerably	off	his

patrol.	 An	 hour	 or	 so	 later	 the	 mist	 began	 to	 get	 gray,	 and	 it	 was	 evident	 that dawn	 was	 near.	 I	 was	 a	 couple	 of	 hundred	 yards	 down	 from	 our	 battalion,	 and my	 man	 and	 I	 made	 for	 the	 trenches	 opposite	 where	 we	 were.	 As	 we	 climbed into	a	sap	head,	I	was	greeted	by	a	Canadian	corporal.	He	invited	me	to	a	tin	of

"char",	and	I	sent	my	man	up	the	line	to	our	own	position.

We	 sat	 on	 the	 fire	 step	 drinking,	 and	 I	 told	 the	 corporal	 about	 meeting	 the sergeant	 out	 in	 front.	 While	 we	 were	 at	 the	 "char"	 it	 kept	 getting	 lighter,	 and presently	a	pair	of	Lewises	started	to	rattle	a	hundred	yards	or	so	away	down	the line.	Then	came	a	sudden	commotion	and	a	kind	of	low,	growling	shout.	That	is

the	best	way	I	can	describe	it.	We	stood	up,	and	below	we	saw	men	going	over

the	top.

"What	 the	 dickens	 can	 this	 be?"	 stuttered	 the	 corporal.	 "There's	 been	 no barrage.	There's	no	orders	for	a	charge.	What	is	it?	What	is	it?"

Well,	 there	 they	 were,	 going	 over,	 as	 many	 as	 two	 hundred	 of	 them—

growling.	 The	 corporal	 and	 I	 climbed	 out	 of	 the	 trench	 at	 the	 rear,	 over	 the parados,	and	ran	across	lots	down	to	a	point	opposite	where	the	Canadians	had

gone	over,	and	watched.

They	swept	across	No	Man's	Land	and	into	the	Boche	trench.	There	was	the

deuce	of	a	ruckus	over	there	for	maybe	two	minutes,	and	then	back	they	came—

carrying	 something.	 Strangely	 enough	 there	 had	 been	 no	 machine-gun	 fire turned	on	them	as	they	crossed,	nor	was	there	as	they	returned.	They	had	cleaned that	German	trench!	And	they	brought	back	the	body	of	a	man—nailed	to	a	rude

crucifix.	 The	 thing	 was	 more	 like	 a	 T	 than	 a	 cross.	 It	 was	 made	 of	 planks, perhaps	two	by	five,	and	the	man	was	spiked	on	by	his	hands	and	feet.	Across

the	 abdomen	 he	 was	 riddled	 with	 bullets	 and	 again	 with	 another	 row	 a	 little higher	up	near	his	chest.	The	man	was	the	sergeant	I	had	talked	to	earlier	in	the night.	What	had	happened	was	this.	He	had,	no	doubt,	been	taken	by	a	German

patrol.	Probably	he	had	refused	to	answer	questions.	Perhaps	he	had	insulted	an

officer.	They	had	crucified	him	and	held	him	up	above	the	parapet.	With	the	first light	his	own	comrades	had	naturally	opened	on	the	thing	with	the	Lewises,	not

knowing	what	it	was.	When	it	got	lighter,	and	they	recognized	the	hellish	thing

that	 had	 been	 done	 to	 one	 of	 their	 men,	 they	 went	 over.	 Nothing	 in	 this	 world

could	have	stopped	them.

The	M.O.	who	viewed	the	body	said	that	without	question	the	man	had	been

crucified	alive.	Also	it	was	said	that	the	same	thing	had	happened	before.

I	told	Captain	Green	of	the	occurrence	when	I	got	back	to	our	own	trenches,

and	he	ordered	me	to	keep	silent,	which	I	did.	It	was	feared	that	if	the	affair	got about	the	men	would	be	"windy"	on	patrol.	However,	the	thing	did	get	about	and was	pretty	well	talked	over.	Too	many	saw	it.

The	 Canadians	 were	 reprimanded	 for	 going	 over	 without	 orders.	 But	 they were	not	punished.	For	their	officers	went	with	them—led	them.

Occasionally	 the	 temptation	 is	 too	 great.	 Once	 I	 was	 out	 on	 patrol	 alone, having	sent	my	man	back	with	a	message,	when	I	encountered	a	Heinie.	I	was

lying	 down	 at	 the	 time.	 A	 flock	 of	 lights	 went	 up	 and	 showed	 this	 fellow standing	about	ten	feet	from	me.	He	had	frozen	and	stayed	that	way	till	the	flares died,	 but	 I	 was	 close	 enough	 to	 see	 that	 he	 was	 a	 German.	 Also—marvel	 of marvels—he	was	alone.

When	 the	 darkness	 settled	 again,	 I	 got	 to	 my	 feet	 and	 jumped	 at	 him.	 He jumped	 at	 me—another	 marvel.	 Going	 into	 the	 clinch	 I	 missed	 him	 with	 the persuader	and	lost	my	grip	on	it,	leaving	the	weapon	dangling	by	the	leather	loop on	my	wrist.	He	had	struck	at	me	with	his	automatic,	which	I	think	he	must	have

dropped,	though	I'm	not	sure	of	that.	Anyway	we	fell	into	each	other's	arms	and

went	 at	 it	 barehanded.	 He	 was	 bigger	 than	 I.	 I	 got	 under	 the	 ribs	 and	 tried	 to squeeze	the	breath	out	of	him,	but	he	was	too	rugged.

At	the	same	time	I	felt	that	he	didn't	relish	the	clinch.	I	slipped	my	elbow	up

and	 got	 under	 his	 chin,	 forcing	 his	 head	 back.	 His	 breath	 smelled	 of	 beer	 and onions.	 I	 was	 choking	 him	 when	 he	 brought	 his	 knee	 up	 and	 got	 me	 in	 the stomach	and	again	on	the	instep	when	he	brought	his	heel	down.

It	broke	my	hold,	and	I	staggered	back	groping	for	the	persuader.	He	jumped

back	as	far	as	I	did.	I	felt	somehow	that	he	was	glad.	So	was	I.	We	stood	for	a

minute,	 and	 I	 heard	 him	 gutter	 out	 something	 that	 sounded	 like	 "Verdamder swinehunt."	Then	we	both	backed	away.

It	seemed	to	me	to	be	the	nicest	way	out	of	the	situation.	No	doubt	he	felt	the

same.

I	seem	to	have	wandered	far	from	the	Quarries	and	the	Grouse	Spots.	Let's

go	back.

We	were	two	days	in	the	Grouse	Spots	and	were	then	relieved,	going	back	to

the	 Quarries	 and	 taking	 the	 place	 of	 Number	 9	 in	 support.	 While	 lying	 there,	 I drew	a	patrol	that	was	interesting	because	it	was	different.

The	 Souchez	 River	 flowed	 down	 from	 Abalaine	 and	 Souchez	 villages	 and

through	 our	 lines	 to	 those	 of	 the	 Germans,	 and	 on	 to	 Lens.	 Spies,	 either	 in	 the army	itself	or	in	the	villages,	had	been	placing	messages	in	bottles	and	floating them	down	the	river	to	the	Germans.

Somebody	found	this	out,	and	a	net	of	chicken	wire	had	been	placed	across

the	river	in	No	Man's	Land.	Some	one	had	to	go	down	there	and	fish	for	bottles

twice	nightly.	I	took	this	patrol	alone.	The	lines	were	rather	far	apart	along	the river,	 owing	 to	 the	 swampy	 nature	 of	 the	 ground,	 which	 made	 livable	 trenches impossible.

I	 slipped	 out	 and	 down	 the	 slight	 incline,	 and	 presently	 found	 myself	 in	 a little	valley.	The	grass	was	rank	and	high,	sometimes	nearly	up	to	my	chin,	and

the	ground	was	slimy	and	treacherous.	I	slipped	into	several	shell	holes	and	was almost	over	my	head	in	the	stagnant,	smelly	water.

I	made	the	river	all	right,	but	there	was	no	bridge	or	net	in	sight.	The	river

was	 not	 over	 ten	 feet	 wide	 and	 there	 was	 supposed	 to	 be	 a	 footbridge	 of	 two planks	where	the	net	was.

I	 got	 back	 into	 the	 grass	 and	 made	 my	 way	 downstream.	 Sliding	 gently through	the	grass,	I	kept	catching	my	feet	in	something	hard	that	felt	like	roots; but	there	were	no	trees	in	the	neighborhood.	I	reached	down	and	groped	in	the

grass	 and	 brought	 up	 a	 human	 rib.	 The	 place	 was	 full	 of	 them,	 and	 skulls.

Stooping,	 I	 could	 see	 them,	 grinning	 up	 out	 of	 the	 dusk,	 hundreds	 of	 them.	 I learned	 afterwards	 that	 this	 was	 called	 the	 Valley	 of	 Death.	 Early	 in	 the	 war several	thousand	Zouaves	had	perished	there,	and	no	attempt	had	been	made	to

bury	them.

After	getting	out	of	the	skeletons,	I	scouted	along	downstream	and	presently

heard	the	low	voices	of	Germans.	Evidently	they	had	found	the	net	and	planned

to	get	the	messages	first.	Creeping	to	the	edge	of	the	grass,	I	peeped	out.	I	was opposite	the	bottle	trap.	I	could	dimly	make	out	the	forms	of	two	men	standing

on	the	nearer	end	of	the	plank	bridge.	They	were,	I	should	judge,	about	ten	yards away,	and	they	hadn't	heard	me.	I	got	out	a	Mills,	pulled	the	pin,	and	pitched	it.

The	bomb	exploded,	perhaps	five	feet	this	side	of	the	men.	One	dropped,	and	the other	ran.

After	a	short	wait	I	ran	over	to	the	German.	I	searched	him	for	papers,	found

none,	and	rolled	him	into	the	river.

After	a	few	days	in	the	Quarries	we	were	moved	to	what	was	known	as	the

Warren,	so	called	because	the	works	resembled	a	rabbit	warren.	This	was	on	the

lower	 side	 and	 to	 the	 left	 end	 of	 Vimy	 Ridge,	 and	 was	 extra	 dangerous.	 It	 did seem	 as	 though	 each	 place	 was	 worse	 than	 the	 last.	 The	 Warren	 was	 a	 regular network	of	trenches,	burrows,	and	funk	holes,	and	we	needed	them	all.

The	 position	 was	 downhill	 from	 the	 Huns,	 and	 they	 kept	 sending	 over	 and down	 a	 continuous	 stream	 of	 "pip-squeaks",	 "whiz-bangs",	 and	 "minnies."	 The

"pip-squeak"	 is	 a	 shell	 that	 starts	 with	 a	 silly	 "pip",	 goes	 on	 with	 a	 sillier

"squeeeeee",	and	goes	off	with	a	man's-size	bang.

The	"whiz-bang"	starts	with	a	rough	whirr	like	a	flushing	cock	partridge,	and goes	off	on	contact	with	a	tremendous	bang.	It	is	not	as	dangerous	as	it	sounds, but	bad	enough.

The	 "minnie"	 is	 about	 the	 size	 of	 a	 two-gallon	 kerosene	 can,	 and	 comes somersaulting	over	in	a	high	arc	and	is	concentrated	death	and	destruction	when

it	lands.	It	has	one	virtue—you	can	see	it	coming	and	dodge,	and	at	night	it	most considerately	leaves	a	trail	of	sparks.

The	 Boche	 served	 us	 full	 portions	 of	 all	 three	 of	 these	 man-killers	 in	 the Warren	and	kept	us	ducking	in	and	out	pretty	much	all	the	time,	night	and	day.

I	 was	 lucky	 enough	 after	 the	 first	 day	 to	 be	 put	 on	 sappers'	 duty.	 The Sappers,	or	Engineers,	are	the	men	whose	duty	it	is	to	run	mines	under	No	Man's

Land	 and	 plant	 huge	 quantities	 of	 explosives.	 There	 was	 a	 great	 amount	 of mining	going	on	all	the	time	at	Vimy	Ridge	from	both	sides.

Sometimes	 Fritz	 would	 run	 a	 sap	 out	 reasonably	 near	 the	 surface,	 and	 we would	 counter	 with	 one	 lower	 down.	 Then	 he'd	 go	 us	 one	 better	 and	 go	 still deeper.	Some	of	the	mines	went	down	and	under	hundreds	of	feet.	The	result	of

all	this	was	that	on	our	side	at	least,	the	Sappers	were	under-manned	and	a	good many	infantry	were	drafted	into	that	service.

I	had	charge	of	a	gang	and	had	to	fill	sandbags	with	the	earth	removed	from

the	end	of	the	sap	and	get	it	out	and	pile	the	bags	on	the	parapets.	We	were	well

out	 toward	 the	 German	 lines	 and	 deep	 under	 the	 hill	 when	 we	 heard	 them digging	 below	 us.	 An	 engineer	 officer	 came	 in	 and	 listened	 for	 an	 hour	 and decided	that	they	were	getting	in	explosives	and	that	it	was	up	to	us	to	beat	them to	 it.	 Digging	 stopped	 at	 once	 and	 we	 began	 rushing	 in	 H.E.	 in	 fifty-pound boxes.	I	was	ordered	back	into	supports	with	my	section.

Right	here	I	began	to	have	luck.	Just	see	how	this	worked	out.	First	a	rushing

party	 was	 organized	 whose	 duty	 it	 was	 to	 rush	 the	 crater	 made	 by	 the	 mine explosion	and	occupy	it	before	the	Germans	got	there.	Sixty	men	were	selected,

a	 few	 from	 each	 company,	 and	 placed	 where	 they	 were	 supposedly	 safe,	 but where	they	could	get	up	fast.	This	is	the	most	dangerous	duty	an	infantryman	has to	do,	because	both	sides	after	a	mine	explosion	shower	in	fifty-seven	varieties of	sudden	death,	including	a	perfect	rain	of	machine-gun	bullets.	The	chances	of coming	out	of	a	rushing	party	with	a	whole	hide	are	about	one	in	five.

Well,	for	a	wonder,	I	didn't	get	drawn	for	this	one,	and	I	breathed	one	long,

deep	sigh	of	relief,	put	my	hand	inside	my	tunic	and	patted	Dinky	on	the	back.

Dinky	is	my	mascot.	I'll	tell	you	about	him	later.

On	top	of	that	another	bit	of	luck	came	along,	though	it	didn't	seem	like	it	at

the	moment.	It	was	the	custom	for	a	ration	party	to	go	out	each	night	and	get	up the	grub.	This	party	had	to	go	over	the	duck	walk	and	was	under	fire	both	going

and	 coming.	 One	 of	 the	 corporals	 who	 had	 been	 out	 on	 rations	 two	 nights	 in succession	began	to	"grouse."

Of	course	Sergeant	Page	spotted	me	and	detailed	me	to	the	"wangler's"	duty.

I	"groused"	too,	like	a	good	fellow,	but	had	to	go.

"Garn,"	says	Wellsie.	"Wot's	the	diff	if	yer	gets	it	'ere	or	there.	If	ye	clicks, I'll	draw	yer	fags	from	Blighty	and	say	a	prayer	for	yer	soul.	On	yer	way."

Cheerful	beggar,	Wellsie.	He	was	doing	me	a	favor	and	didn't	know	it.

I	 did	 the	 three	 miles	 along	 the	 duck	 walk	 with	 the	 ration	 party,	 and	 there wasn't	 a	 shell	 came	 our	 way.	 Queer!	 Nor	 on	 the	 way	 back.	 Queerer!	 When	 we were	 nearly	 back	 and	 were	 about	 five	 hundred	 yards	 from	 the	 base	 of	 the Pimple,	a	dead	silence	fell	on	the	German	side	of	the	line.	There	wasn't	a	gun	nor a	mortar	nor	even	a	rifle	in	action	for	a	mile	in	either	direction.	There	was,	too,	a kind	of	sympathetic	let-up	on	our	side.	There	weren't	any	lights	going	up.	There was	an	electric	tension	in	the	very	air.	You	could	tell	by	the	feel	that	something big	was	going	to	happen.

I	halted	the	ration	party	at	the	end	of	the	duck	walk	and	waited.	But	not	for long.	 Suddenly	 the	 "Very"	 lights	 went	 up	 from	 the	 German	 side,	 literally	 in hundreds,	 illuminating	 the	 top	 of	 the	 ridge	 and	 the	 sky	 behind	 with	 a	 thin greenish	white	flare.	Then	came	a	deep	rumble	that	shook	the	ground,	and	a	dull

boom.	A	spurt	of	blood-red	flame	squirted	up	from	the	near	side	of	the	hill,	and	a rolling	column	of	gray	smoke.

Then	 another	 rumble,	 and	 another,	 and	 then	 the	 whole	 side	 of	 the	 ridge seemed	 to	 open	 up	 and	 move	 slowly	 skyward	 with	 a	 world-wrecking,	 soul-paralyzing	 crash.	 A	 murky	 red	 glare	 lit	 up	 the	 smoke	 screen,	 and	 against	 it	 a mass	 of	 tossed-up	 debris,	 and	 for	 an	 instant	 I	 caught	 the	 black	 silhouette	 of	 a whole	human	body	spread-eagled	and	spinning	like	a	pin-wheel.

Most	of	our	party,	even	at	the	distance,	were	knocked	down	by	the	gigantic

impact	 of	 the	 explosion.	 A	 shower	 of	 earth	 and	 rock	 chunks,	 some	 as	 big	 as	 a barrel,	fell	around	us.

Then	 we	 heard	 a	 far-away	 cheering,	 and	 in	 the	 light	 of	 the	 flares	 we	 saw	 a newly	 made	 hill	 and	 our	 men	 swarming	 up	 it	 to	 the	 crater.	 Two	 mines	 had exploded,	 and	 the	 whole	 side	 of	 the	 Pimple	 had	 been	 torn	 away.	 Half	 of	 our rushing	 party	 were	 killed	 and	 we	 had	 sixty	 casualties	 from	 shock	 and	 wounds among	 men	 who	 were	 supposed	 to	 be	 at	 a	 safe	 distance	 from	 the	 mining operation.	But	we	took	and	held	the	new	crater	positions.

The	 corporal	 whose	 place	 I	 had	 taken	 on	 the	 ration	 party	 was	 killed	 by falling	stones.	Inasmuch	as	he	was	where	I	would	have	been,	I	considered	that	I

had	had	a	narrow	escape	from	"going	west!"	More	luck!





CHAPTER	VIII

ON	THE	GO

Marching,	marching,	marching,

Always	ruddy	well	marching.

Marching	all	the	morning,

And	marching	all	the	night.

Marching,	marching,	marching,

Always	ruddy	well	marching,

Roll	on	till	my	time	is	up

And	I	shall	march	no	more.

We	sung	it	to	the	tune	of	"Holy,	Holy,	Holy",	the	whole	blooming	battalion.

As	 we	 swung	 down	 the	 Boulevard	 Alsace-Lorraine	 in	 Amiens	 and	 passed	 the great	cathedral	up	there	to	the	left,	on	its	little	rise	of	ground,	the	chant	lifted	and lilted	 and	 throbbed	 up	 from	 near	 a	 thousand	 throats,	 much	 as	 the	 unisoned devotions	of	the	olden	monks	must	have	done	in	other	days.

Ours	was	a	holy	cause,	but	despite	the	association	of	the	tune	the	song	was

far	 from	 being	 a	 holy	 song.	 It	 was,	 rather,	 a	 chanted	 remonstrance	 against	 all hiking	and	against	this	one	in	particular.

After	 our	 service	 at	 Vimy	 Ridge	 some	 one	 in	 authority	 somewhere	 decided that	 the	 22nd	 Battalion	 and	 two	 others	 were	 not	 quite	 good	 enough	 for	 really smart	 work.	 We	 were,	 indeed,	 hard.	 But	 not	 hard	 enough.	 So	 some	 superior intellect	squatting	somewhere	in	the	safety	of	the	rear,	with	a	finger	on	the	pulse of	the	army,	decreed	that	we	were	to	get	not	only	hard	but	tough;	and	to	that	end we	were	to	hike.	Hike	we	did.

For	 more	 than	 three	 weeks	 we	 went	 from	 place	 to	 place	 with	 no	 apparent destination,	 wandering	 aimlessly	 up	 and	 down	 the	 country-side	 of	 Northern France,	 imposing	 ourselves	 upon	 the	 people	 of	 little	 villages,	 shamming	 battle over	their	cultivated	fields,	and	sleeping	in	their	hen	coops.

I	kept	a	diary	on	that	hike.	It	was	a	thing	forbidden,	but	I	managed	it.	One

manages	many	things	out	there.	I	have	just	read	over	that	diary.	There	isn't	much to	 it	 but	 a	 succession	 of	 town	 names,—Villiers	 du	 Bois,	 Maisincourt,	 Barly,

Oneaux,	 Canchy,	 Amiens,	 Bourdon,	 Villiers	 Bocage,	 Agenvilliers,	 Behencourt, and	 others	 that	 I	 failed	 to	 set	 down	 and	 have	 forgotten.	 We	 swept	 across	 that country,	 sweating	 under	 our	 packs,	 hardening	 our	 muscles,	 stopping	 here	 for	 a day,	 there	 for	 five	 days	 for	 extended-order	 drills	 and	 bayonet	 and	 musketry practice,	and	somewhere	else	for	a	sham	battle.	We	were	getting	ready	to	go	into the	Somme.

The	 weather,	 by	 some	 perversity	 of	 fate,	 was	 fair	 during	 all	 of	 that	 hiking time.	 Whenever	 I	 was	 in	 the	 trenches	 it	 always	 rained,	 whether	 the	 season warranted	it	or	not.	Except	on	days	when	we	were	scheduled	to	go	over	the	top.

Then,	probably	because	rain	will	sometimes	hold	up	a	planned-for	attack,	it	was

always	fair.

On	 the	 hike,	 with	 good	 roads	 under	 foot,	 the	 soldier	 does	 not	 mind	 a	 little wet	and	welcomes	a	lot	of	clouds.	No	such	luck	for	us.	It	was	clear	all	the	time.

Not	only	clear	but	blazing	hot	August	weather.

On	 our	 first	 march	 out	 of	 the	 Cabaret	 Rouge	 communication	 trench	 we

covered	a	matter	of	ten	miles	to	a	place	called	Villiers	du	Bois.	Before	that	I	had never	fully	realized	just	what	it	meant	to	go	it	in	full	heavy	equipment.

Often	on	the	march	I	compared	my	lot	with	that	of	the	medieval	soldier	who

had	done	his	fighting	over	these	same	fields	of	Northern	France.

The	knight	of	the	Middle	Ages	was	all	dressed	up	like	a	hardware	store	with,

I	should	judge,	about	a	hundred	pounds	of	armor.	But	he	rode	a	horse	and	had	a

squire	or	some	such	striker	trailing	along	in	the	rear	with	the	things	to	make	him comfortable,	when	the	fighting	was	over.

The	 modern	 soldier	 gets	 very	 little	 help	 in	 his	 war	 making.	 He	 is,	 in	 fact, more	likely	to	be	helping	somebody	else	than	asking	for	assistance	for	himself.

The	 soldier	 has	 two	 basic	 functions:	 first,	 to	 keep	 himself	 whole	 and	 healthy; second,	 to	 kill	 the	 other	 fellow.	 To	 the	 end	 that	 he	 may	 do	 these	 two	 perfectly simple	things,	he	has	to	carry	about	eighty	pounds	of	weight	all	the	time.

He	 has	 a	 blanket,	 a	 waterproof	 sheet,	 a	 greatcoat,	 extra	 boots,	 extra underwear,	 a	 haversack	 with	 iron	 rations,	 entrenching	 tools,	 a	 bayonet,	 a	 water bottle,	a	mess	kit,	a	rifle,	two	hundred	fifty	rounds	of	ammo,	a	tin	hat,	two	gas helmets,	 and	 a	 lot	 of	 miscellaneous	 small	 junk.	 All	 this	 is	 draped,	 hung,	 and otherwise	 disposed	 over	 his	 figure	 by	 means	 of	 a	 web	 harness	 having	 more hooks	than	a	hatrack.	He	parallels	the	old-time	knight	only	in	the	matter	of	the

steel	 helmet	 and	 the	 rifle,	 which,	 with	 the	 bayonet,	 corresponds	 to	 the	 lance, sword,	and	battle-ax,	three	in	one.

The	 modern	 soldier	 carries	 all	 his	 worldly	 goods	 with	 him	 all	 the	 time.	 He hates	to	hike.	But	he	has	to.

I	remember	very	vividly	that	first	day.	The	temperature	was	around	90°,	and

some	fool	officers	had	arranged	that	we	start	at	one,—the	very	worst	time	of	the day.	 The	 roads	 so	 near	 the	 front	 were	 pulverized,	 and	 the	 dust	 rose	 in	 dense clouds.	The	long	straight	lines	of	poplars	beside	the	road	were	gray	with	it,	and the	heat	waves	shimmered	up	from	the	fields.

Before	we	had	gone	five	miles	the	men	began	to	wilt.	Right	away	I	had	some

more	of	the	joys	of	being	a	corporal	brought	home	to	me.	I	was	already	touched

with	trench	fever	and	was	away	under	par.	That	didn't	make	any	difference.

On	 the	 march,	 when	 the	 men	 begin	 to	 weaken,	 an	 officer	 is	 sure	 to	 trot	 up and	say:

"Corporal	Holmes,	just	carry	this	man's	rifle,"	or	"Corporal	Collins,	take	that man's	pack.	He's	jolly	well	done."

Seemingly	 the	 corporal	 never	 is	 supposed	 to	 be	 jolly	 well	 done.	 If	 one complained,	his	officer	would	look	at	him	with	astounded	reproach	and	say:

"Why,	 Corporal.	 We	 cawn't	 have	 this,	 you	 know!	 You	 are	 a	 Non-

commissioned	Officer,	and	you	must	set	an	example.	You	must,	rahly."

When	we	finally	hit	the	town	where	our	billets	were,	we	found	our	company

quartered	in	an	old	barn.	It	was	dirty,	and	there	was	a	pigpen	at	one	end,—very

smelly	in	the	August	heat.	We	flopped	in	the	ancient	filth.	The	cooties	were	very active,	 as	 we	 were	 drenched	 with	 sweat	 and	 hadn't	 had	 a	 bath	 since	 heavens knew	when.	We	had	had	about	ten	minutes'	rest	and	were	thinking	about	getting

out	 of	 the	 harness	 when	 up	 came	 Mad	 Harry,	 one	 of	 our	 "leftenants",	 and ordered	us	out	for	foot	inspection.

I	don't	want	to	say	anything	unfair	about	this	man.	He	is	dead	now.	I	saw	him

die.	He	was	brave.	He	knew	his	job	all	right,	but	he	was	a	fine	example	of	what

an	officer	ought	not	to	be.	The	only	reason	I	speak	of	him	is	because	I	want	to

say	something	about	officers	in	general.

This	Mad	Harry,—I	do	not	give	his	surname	for	obvious	reasons,—was	the

son	 of	 one	 of	 the	 richest-new-rich-merchant	 families	 in	 England.	 He	 was	 very highly	educated,	had,	I	take	it,	spent	the	most	of	his	life	with	the	classics.	He	was long	and	thin	and	sallow	and	fish-eyed.	He	spoke	in	a	low	colorless	monotone,

absolutely	 without	 any	 inflection	 whatever.	 The	 men	 thought	 he	 was	 balmy.

Hence	the	nickname	Mad	Harry.

Mad	Harry	was	a	fiend	for	walking.	And	at	the	end	of	a	twenty-mile	hike	in

heavy	marching	order	he	would	casually	stroll	alongside	some	sweating	soldier

and	drone	out,

"I	say,	Private	Stetson.	Don't	you	just	love	to	hike?"

Then	and	there	he	made	a	lifelong	personal	enemy	of	Private	Stetson.	In	the

same	or	similar	ways	he	made	personal	enemies	of	every	private	soldier	he	came

in	contact	with.

It	may	do	no	harm	to	tell	how	Mad	Harry	died.	He	came	very	near	being	shot

by	one	of	his	own	men.

It	was	on	the	Somme.	We	were	in	the	middle	of	a	bit	of	a	show,	and	we	were

all	hands	down	in	shell	holes	with	a	heavy	machine-gun	fire	crackling	overhead.

I	was	in	one	hole,	and	in	the	next,	which	merged	with	mine,	were	two	chaps	who

were	cousins.

Mad	Harry	came	along,	walking	perfectly	upright,	regardless	of	danger,	with

his	 left	 arm	 shattered.	 He	 dropped	 into	 the	 next	 shell	 hole	 and	 with	 his expressionless	drawl	unshaken,	said,	"Private	X.	Dress	my	arm."

Private	 X	 got	 out	 his	 own	 emergency	 bandage	 and	 fixed	 the	 arm.	 When	 it was	done	Mad	Harry,	still	speaking	in	his	monotonous	drone,	said:

"Now,	Private	X,	get	up	out	of	this	hole.	Don't	be	hiding."

Private	X	obeyed	orders	without	a	question.	He	climbed	out	and	fell	with	a

bullet	 through	 his	 head.	 His	 cousin,	 who	 was	 a	 very	 dear	 friend	 of	 the	 boy, evidently	 went	 more	 or	 less	 crazy	 at	 this.	 I	 saw	 him	 leap	 at	 Mad	 Harry	 and snatch	 his	 pistol	 from	 the	 holster.	 He	 was,	 I	 think,	 about	 to	 shoot	 his	 officer when	a	shell	burst	overhead	and	killed	them	both.

Well,	 on	 this	 first	 day	 of	 the	 hike	 Mad	 Harry	 ordered	 us	 out	 for	 foot inspection,	as	I	have	said.	I	found	that	I	simply	couldn't	get	them	out.	They	were in	no	condition	for	foot	inspection,—hadn't	washed	for	days.	Harry	came	round

and	gave	me	a	royal	dressing	down	and	ordered	the	whole	bunch	out	for	parade and	 helmet	 inspection.	 We	 were	 kept	 standing	 for	 an	 hour.	 You	 couldn't	 blame the	men	for	hating	an	officer	of	that	kind.

It	is	only	fair	to	say	that	Mad	Harry	was	not	a	usual	type	of	British	officer.

He	simply	carried	to	excess	the	idea	of	discipline	and	unquestioning	obedience.

The	principle	of	discipline	is	the	guts	and	backbone	of	any	army.	I	am	inclined	to think	that	it	is	more	than	half	the	making	of	any	soldier.	There	has	been	a	good deal	 of	 talk	 in	 the	 press	 about	 a	 democratic	 army.	 As	 a	 matter	 of	 fact fraternization	 between	 men	 and	 officers	 is	 impossible	 except	 in	 nations	 of exceptional	 temperament	 and	 imagination,	 like	 the	 French.	 The	 French	 are unique	in	everything.	It	follows	that	their	army	can	do	things	that	no	other	army can.	It	is	common	to	see	a	French	officer	sitting	in	a	cafe	drinking	with	a	private.

In	 the	 British	 army	 that	 could	 not	 be.	 The	 new	 British	 army	 is	 more democratic,	 no	 doubt,	 than	 the	 old.	 But	 except	 in	 the	 heat	 of	 battle,	 no	 British officer	can	relax	his	dignity	very	much.	With	the	exception	of	Mr.	Blofeld,	who

was	 one	 of	 those	 rare	 characters	 who	 can	 be	 personally	 close	 and	 sympathetic and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 command	 respect	 and	 implicit	 obedience,	 I	 never	 knew	 a successful	officer	who	did	not	seem	to	be	almost	of	another	world.

Our	 Colonel	 was	 a	 fine	 man,	 but	 he	 was	 as	 dignified	 as	 a	 Supreme	 Court Judge.	Incidentally	he	was	as	just.	I	have	watched	Colonel	Flowers	many	times

when	 he	 was	 holding	 orders.	 This	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 court	 when	 all	 men	 who	 have committed	 crimes	 and	 have	 been	 passed	 on	 by	 the	 captains	 appear	 before	 the Colonel.

Colonel	 Flowers	 would	 sit	 smiling	 behind	 his	 hand,	 and	 would	 try	 his

hardest	to	find	"mitigating	circumstances";	but	when	none	could	be	dug	out	he passed	sentence	with	the	last	limit	of	severity,	and	the	man	that	was	up	for	orders didn't	come	again	if	he	knew	what	was	good	for	himself.

I	 think	 that	 on	 the	 hike	 we	 all	 got	 to	 know	 our	 officers	 better	 than	 we	 had known	them	in	the	trenches.	Their	real	characters	came	out.	You	knew	how	far

you	could	go	with	them,	and	what	was	more	important,	how	far	you	couldn't	go.

It	 was	 at	 Dieval	 that	 my	 rank	 as	 lance	 corporal	 was	 confirmed.	 It	 is customary,	 when	 a	 rookie	 has	 been	 made	 a	 non-com	 in	 training,	 to	 reduce	 him immediately	 when	 he	 gets	 to	 France.	 I	 had	 joined	 in	 the	 trenches	 and	 had volunteered	for	a	raiding	party	and	there	had	been	no	opportunity	to	reduce	me.	I had	not,	however,	had	a	corporal's	pay.	My	confirmation	came	at	Dieval,	and	I

was	put	on	pay.	I	would	have	willingly	sacrificed	the	pay	and	the	so-called	honor to	have	been	a	private.

Our	 routine	 throughout	 the	 hike	 was	 always	 about	 the	 same,	 that	 is	 in	 the intervals	 when	 we	 were	 in	 any	 one	 place	 for	 a	 day	 or	 more.	 It	 was,	 up	 at	 six, breakfast	of	tea,	bread,	and	bacon.	Drill	till	noon;	dinner;	drill	till	five.	After	that nothing	 to	 do	 till	 to-morrow,	 unless	 we	 got	 night	 'ops,	 which	 was	 about	 two nights	out	of	three.

There	were	few	Y.M.C.A.	huts	so	far	behind	the	lines,	and	the	short	time	up

to	 nine	 was	 usually	 spent	 in	 the	 estaminets.	 The	 games	 of	 house	 were	 in	 full blast	all	the	time.

On	the	hike	we	were	paid	weekly.	Privates	got	five	francs,	corporals	ten,	and

sergeants	fifteen	to	twenty	a	week.	That's	a	lot	of	money.	Anything	left	over	was held	back	to	be	paid	when	we	got	to	Blighty.	Parcels	and	mail	came	along	with

perfect	 regularity	 on	 that	 hike.	 It	 was	 and	 is	 a	 marvel	 to	 me	 how	 they	 do	 it.	 A battalion	 chasing	 around	 all	 over	 the	 place	 gets	 its	 stuff	 from	 Blighty	 day	 after day,	 right	 on	 the	 tick	 and	 without	 any	 question.	 I	 only	 hope	 that	 whatever	 the system	 is,	 our	 army	 will	 take	 advantage	 of	 it.	 A	 shortage	 of	 letters	 and	 luxury parcels	is	a	real	hardship.

We	finally	brought	up	at	a	place	called	Oneux	(pronounced	Oh,	no)	and	were

there	five	days.	I	fell	into	luck	here.	It	was	customary,	when	we	were	marching

on	 some	 unsuspecting	 village,	 to	 send	 the	 quartermaster	 sergeants	 ahead	 on bicycles	to	locate	billets.	We	had	an	old	granny	named	Cypress,	better	known	as

Lizzie.	 The	 other	 sergeants	 were	 accustomed	 to	 flim-flam	 Lizzie	 to	 a	 finish	 on the	selection	of	billets,	with	the	result	that	C	company	usually	slept	in	pigpens	of stables.

The	day	we	approached	Oneux,	Lizzie	was	sick,	and	I	was	delegated	to	his

job.	I	went	into	the	town	with	the	three	other	quartermaster	sergeants,	got	them into	an	 estaminet,	bought	about	a	dollar's	worth	of	drinks,	sneaked	out	the	back door,	and	preempted	the	schoolhouse	for	C	company.	I	also	took	the	house	next

door,	 which	 was	 big	 and	 clean,	 for	 the	 officers.	 We	 were	 royally	 comfortable there,	and	the	other	companies	used	the	stables	that	usually	fell	to	our	lot.

As	a	reward,	I	suspect,	I	was	picked	for	Orderly	Corporal,	a	cushy	job.	We

all	of	us	had	it	fairly	easy	at	Oneux.	It	was	hot	weather,	and	nights	we	used	to	sit out	in	the	schoolhouse	yard	and	talk	about	the	war.

Some	 of	 the	 opinions	 voiced	 out	 there	 with	 more	 frankness	 than	 any	 one would	dare	to	use	at	home	would,	I	am	sure,	shock	some	of	the	patriots.	The	fact is	that	any	one	who	has	fought	in	France	wants	peace,	and	the	sooner	the	better.

We	had	one	old-timer,	out	since	Mons,	who	habitually,	night	after	night,	day

after	day,	would	pipe	up	with	the	same	old	plaint.	Something	like	this:

"Hi	 arsks	 yer.	 Wot	 are	 we	 fightin'	 for?	 Wot'd	 th'	 Belgiums	 hever	 do	 fer	 us?

Wot?	Wot'd	th'	Rooshians	hever	do	fer	us?	Wot's	th'	good	of	th'	Frenchies?	Wot's th'	good	of	hanybody	but	th'	Henglish?	Gawd	lumme!	I'm	fed	up."

And	yet	this	man	had	gone	out	at	the	beginning	and	would	fight	like	the	very

devil,	and	I	verily	believe	will	be	homesick	for	the	trenches	if	he	is	alive	when	it is	all	over.

Bones,	who	was	educated	and	a	thoughtful	reader,	had	it	figured	out	that	the

war	 was	 all	 due	 to	 the	 tyranny	 of	 the	 ruling	 classes,	 with	 the	 Kaiser	 the	 chief offender.

A	 lot	 of	 the	 men	 wanted	 peace	 at	 any	 reasonable	 price.	 Anything,	 so	 they would	get	back	to	'Arriet	or	Sadie	or	Maria.

I	 should	 say	 offhand	 that	 there	 was	 not	 one	 man	 in	 a	 hundred	 who	 was fighting	 consciously	 for	 any	 great	 recognized	 principle.	 And	 yet,	 with	 all	 their grousing	 and	 criticism,	 and	 all	 their	 overwhelming	 desire	 to	 have	 it	 over	 with, every	one	of	them	was	loyal	and	brave	and	a	hard	fighter.

A	 good	 deal	 has	 been	 written	 about	 the	 brilliancy	 of	 the	 Canadians	 and	 the other	Colonials.	Too	much	credit	cannot	be	given	these	men.	In	an	attack	there

are	 no	 troops	 with	 more	 dash	 than	 the	 Canadians,	 but	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 taking punishment	and	hanging	on	a	hopeless	situation,	there	are	no	troops	in	the	wide

world	 who	 can	 equal,	 much	 less	 surpass,	 the	 English.	 Personally	 I	 think	 that comparisons	should	be	avoided.	All	the	Allies	are	doing	their	full	duty	with	all that	is	in	them.

During	 most	 of	 the	 war	 talk,	 it	 was	 my	 habit	 to	 keep	 discreetly	 quiet.	 We were	not	in	the	war	yet,	and	any	remarks	from	me	usually	drew	some	hot	shot

about	Mr.	Wilson's	"blankety-blinked	bloomin'	notes."

There	 was	 another	 American,	 a	 chap	 named	 Sanford	 from	 Virginia,	 in	 B

company,	and	he	and	I	used	to	furnish	a	large	amount	of	entertainment	in	these

war	 talks.	 Sanford	 was	 a	 F.F.V.	 and	 didn't	 care	 who	 knew	 it.	 Also	 he	 thought

General	Lee	was	the	greatest	military	genius	ever	known.	One	night	he	and	I	got started	and	had	it	hot	and	heavy	as	to	the	merits	of	the	Civil	War.	This	for	some reason	tickled	the	Tommies	half	to	death,	and	after	that	they	would	egg	us	on	to a	discussion.

One	 of	 them	 would	 slyly	 say,	 "Darby,	 'oo	 th'	 blinkin'	 'ell	 was	 this	 blighter, General	Grant?"

Or,	"Hi	sye,	Sandy,	Hi	'eard	Darby	syin'	'ow	this	General	Lee	was	a	bleedin'

swab."

Then	Sanford	and	I	would	pass	the	wink	and	go	at	it	tooth	and	nail.	It	was

ridiculous,	 arguing	 the	 toss	 on	 a	 long-gone-by	 small-time	 scrap	 like	 the	 Civil War	 with	 the	 greatest	 show	 in	 history	 going	 on	 all	 around	 us.	 Anyway	 the Tommies	 loved	 it	 and	 would	 fairly	 howl	 with	 delight	 when	 we	 got	 to	 going good.

It	 is	 strange,	 but	 with	 so	 many	 Americans	 in	 the	 British	 service,	 I	 ran	 up against	 very	 few.	 I	 remember	 one	 night	 when	 we	 were	 making	 a	 night	 march from	 one	 village	 to	 another,	 we	 stopped	 for	 the	 customary	 ten-minutes-in-the-hour	rest.	Over	yonder	in	a	field	there	was	a	camp	of	some	kind,—probably	field

artillery.	There	was	dim	light	of	a	fire	and	the	low	murmur	of	voices.	And	then	a fellow	began	to	sing	in	a	nice	tenor:

Bury	me	not	on	the	lone	prairie

Where	the	wild	coyotes	howl	o'er	me.

Bury	me	down	in	the	little	churchyard

In	a	grave	just	six	by	three.

The	last	time	I	had	heard	that	song	was	in	New	Orleans,	and	it	was	sung	by	a

wild	Texan.	So	I	yelled,	"Hello	there,	Texas."

He	answered,	"Hello,	Yank.	Where	from?"

I	answered,	"Boston."

"Give	 my	 regards	 to	 Tremont	 Street	 and	 go	 to	 hell,"	 says	 he.	 A	 gale	 of laughter	came	out	of	the	night.	Just	then	we	had	the	order	to	fall	in,	and	away	we went.	I'd	like	to	know	sometime	who	that	chap	was.

After	knocking	about	all	over	the	north	of	France	seemingly,	we	brought	up

at	 Canchy	 of	 a	 Sunday	 afternoon.	 Here	 the	 whole	 brigade,	 four	 battalions,	 had

church	 parade,	 and	 after	 that	 the	 band	 played	 ragtime	 and	 the	 officers	 had	 a gabfest	and	compared	medals,	on	top	of	which	we	were	soaked	with	two	hours'

steady	drill.	We	were	at	Canchy	ten	days,	and	they	gave	it	to	us	good	and	plenty.

We	would	drill	all	day	and	after	dark	it	would	be	night	'ops.	Finally	so	many	men were	going	to	the	doctor	worn	out	that	he	ordered	a	whole	day	and	a	half	of	rest.

Mr.	 Blofeld	 on	 Saturday	 night	 suggested	 that,	 as	 we	 were	 going	 into	 the Somme	 within	 a	 few	 weeks,	 the	 non-coms	 ought	 to	 have	 a	 little	 blow-out.	 It would	be	the	last	time	we	would	all	ever	be	together.	He	furnished	us	with	all	the drinkables	we	could	get	away	with,	including	some	very	choice	Johnny	Walker.

There	 was	 a	 lot	 of	 canned	 stuff,	 mostly	 sardines.	 Mr.	 Blofeld	 loaned	 us	 the officers'	phonograph.

It	was	a	large,	wet	night.	Everybody	made	a	speech	or	sang	a	song,	and	we

didn't	go	home	until	morning.	It	was	a	farewell	party,	and	we	went	the	limit.	If there	is	one	thing	that	the	Britisher	does	better	than	another,	it	is	getting	ready	to die.	He	does	it	with	a	smile,—and	he	dies	with	a	laugh.

Poor	 chaps!	 Nearly	 all	 of	 them	 are	 pushing	 up	 the	 daisies	 somewhere	 in France.	Those	who	are	not	are,	with	one	or	two	exceptions,	out	of	the	army	with

broken	bodies.





CHAPTER	IX

FIRST	SIGHT	OF	THE	TANKS

Late	in	the	summer	I	accumulated	a	nice	little	case	of	trench	fever.

This	 disease	 is	 due	 to	 remaining	 for	 long	 periods	 in	 the	 wet	 and	 mud,	 to racked	nerves,	and,	I	am	inclined	to	think,	to	sleeping	in	the	foul	air	of	the	dug-outs.	The	chief	symptom	is	high	temperature,	and	the	patient	aches	a	good	deal.	I was	 sent	 back	 to	 a	 place	 in	 the	 neighborhood	 of	 Arras	 and	 was	 there	 a	 week recuperating.

While	I	was	there	a	woman	spy	whom	I	had	known	in	Abalaine	was	brought

to	the	village	and	shot.	The	frequency	with	which	the	duck	walk	at	Abalaine	had

been	 shelled,	 especially	 when	 ration	 parties	 or	 troops	 were	 going	 over	 it,	 had attracted	a	good	deal	of	attention.

There	 was	 a	 single	 house	 not	 far	 from	 the	 end	 of	 that	 duck	 walk	 west	 of Abalaine,	occupied	by	a	woman	and	two	or	three	children.	She	had	lived	there

for	 years	 and	 was,	 so	 far	 as	 anybody	 knew,	 a	 Frenchwoman	 in	 breeding	 and sympathies.	She	was	in	the	habit	of	selling	coffee	to	the	soldiers,	and,	of	course, gossiped	 with	 them	 and	 thus	 gained	 a	 good	 deal	 of	 information	 about	 troop movements.

She	was	not	suspected	for	a	long	time.	Then	a	gunner	of	a	battery	which	was

stationed	near	by	noticed	that	certain	children's	garments,	a	red	shirt	and	a	blue one	and	several	white	garments,	were	on	the	clothesline	in	certain	arrangement

on	 the	 days	 when	 troops	 were	 to	 be	 moved	 along	 the	 duck	 walk	 the	 following night.	 This	 soldier	 notified	 his	 officers,	 and	 evidence	 was	 accumulated	 that	 the woman	was	signalling	to	the	Boche	airplanes.

She	 was	 arrested,	 taken	 to	 the	 rear,	 and	 shot.	 I	 don't	 like	 to	 think	 that	 this woman	 was	 really	 French.	 She	 was,	 no	 doubt,	 one	 of	 the	 myriad	 of	 spies	 who were	planted	in	France	by	the	Germans	long	before	the	war.

After	 getting	 over	 the	 fever,	 I	 rejoined	 my	 battalion	 in	 the	 early	 part	 of September	in	the	Somme	district	at	a	place	called	Mill	Street.	This	was	in	reality a	series	of	dug-outs	along	a	road	some	little	distance	behind	our	second	lines,	but

in	 the	 range	 of	 the	 German	 guns,	 which	 persistently	 tried	 for	 our	 artillery	 just beside	us.

Within	an	hour	of	my	arrival	I	was	treated	to	a	taste	of	one	of	the	forms	of

German	kultur	which	was	new	at	the	time.	At	least	it	was	new	to	me—tear	gas.

This	 delectable	 vapor	 came	 over	 in	 shells,	 comparatively	 harmless	 in

themselves,	but	which	loosed	a	gas,	smelling	at	first	a	little	like	pineapple.	When you	 got	 a	 good	 inhale	 you	 choked,	 and	 the	 eyes	 began	 to	 run.	 There	 was	 no controlling	 the	 tears,	 and	 the	 victim	 would	 fairly	 drip	 for	 a	 long	 time,	 leaving him	wholly	incapacitated.

Goggles	provided	for	this	gas	were	nearly	useless,	and	we	all	resorted	to	the

regular	gas	helmet.	In	this	way	we	were	able	to	stand	the	stuff.

The	 gas	 mask,	 by	 the	 way,	 was	 the	 bane	 of	 my	 existence	 in	 the	 trenches—

one	of	the	banes.	I	found	that	almost	invariably	after	I	had	had	mine	on	for	a	few minutes	 I	 got	 faint.	 Very	 often	 I	 would	 keel	 over	 entirely.	 A	 good	 many	 of	 the men	were	affected	the	same	way,	either	from	the	lack	of	air	inside	the	mask	or

by	the	influence	of	the	chemicals	with	which	the	protector	is	impregnated.

One	of	the	closest	calls	I	had	in	all	my	war	experience	was	at	Mills	Street.

And	Fritz	was	not	to	blame.

Several	 of	 the	 men,	 including	 myself,	 were	 squatted	 around	 a	 brazier

cooking	 char	 and	 getting	 warm,	 for	 the	 nights	 were	 cold,	 when	 there	 was	 a terrific	 explosion.	 Investigation	 proved	 that	 an	 unexploded	 bomb	 had	 been buried	 under	 the	 brazier,	 and	 that	 it	 had	 gone	 off	 as	 the	 heat	 penetrated	 the ground.	 It	 is	 a	 wonder	 there	 weren't	 more	 of	 these	 accidents,	 as	 Tommy	 was forever	throwing	away	his	Millses.

The	 Mills	 bomb	 fires	 by	 pulling	 out	 a	 pin	 which	 releases	 a	 lever	 which explodes	the	bomb	after	four	seconds.	Lots	of	men	never	really	trust	a	bomb.	If

you	have	one	in	your	pocket,	you	feel	that	the	pin	may	somehow	get	out,	and	if

it	does	you	know	that	you'll	go	to	glory	in	small	bits.	I	always	had	that	feeling myself	and	used	to	throw	away	my	Millses	and	scoop	a	hatful	of	dirt	over	them

with	my	foot.

This	 particular	 bomb	 killed	 one	 man,	 wounded	 several,	 and	 shocked	 all	 of us.	Two	of	the	men	managed	to	"swing"	a	"blighty"	case	out	of	it.	I	could	have done	the	same	if	I	had	been	wise	enough.

I	think	I	ought	to	say	a	word	right	here	about	the	psychology	of	the	Tommy in	swinging	a	"blighty"	case.

It	 is	 the	 one	 first,	 last,	 and	 always	 ambition	 of	 the	 Tommy	 to	 get	 back	 to Blighty.	Usually	he	isn't	"out	there"	because	he	wants	to	be	but	because	he	has	to be.	He	is	a	patriot	all	right.	His	love	of	Blighty	shows	that.	He	will	fight	like	a bag	 of	 wildcats	 when	 he	 gets	 where	 the	 fighting	 is,	 but	 he	 isn't	 going	 around looking	for	trouble.	He	knows	that	his	officers	will	find	that	for	him	a-plenty.

When	he	gets	letters	from	home	and	knows	that	the	wife	or	the	"nippers"	or the	old	mother	is	sick,	he	wants	to	go	home.	And	so	he	puts	in	his	time	hoping

for	a	wound	that	will	be	"cushy"	enough	not	to	discommode	him	much	and	that will	be	bad	enough	to	swing	Blighty	on.	Sometimes	when	he	wants	very	much	to

get	back	he	stretches	his	conscience	to	the	limit—and	it	is	pretty	elastic	anyhow

—and	 he	 fakes	 all	 sorts	 of	 illness.	 The	 M.O.	 is	 usually	 a	 bit	 too	 clever	 for Tommy,	however,	and	out	and	out	fakes	seldom	get	by.	Sometimes	they	do,	and

in	the	most	unexpected	cases.

I	 had	 a	 man	 named	 Isadore	 Epstein	 in	 my	 section	 who	 was	 instrumental	 in getting	Blighty	for	himself	and	one	other.	Issy	was	a	tailor	by	trade.	He	was	no fighting	 man	 and	 didn't	 pretend	 to	 be,	 and	 he	 didn't	 care	 who	 knew	 it.	 He	 was wild	to	get	a	"blighty	one"	or	shell	shock,	or	anything	that	would	take	him	home.

One	morning	as	we	were	preparing	to	go	over	the	top,	and	the	men	were	a

little	jumpy	and	nervous,	I	heard	a	shot	behind	me,	and	a	bullet	chugged	into	the sandbags	 beside	 my	 head.	 I	 whirled	 around,	 my	 first	 thought	 being	 that	 some one	 of	 our	 own	 men	 was	 trying	 to	 do	 me	 in.	 This	 is	 a	 thing	 that	 sometimes happens	 to	 unpopular	 officers	 and	 less	 frequently	 to	 the	 men.	 But	 not	 in	 this case.

It	 was	 Issy	 Epstein.	 He	 had	 been	 monkeying	 with	 his	 rifle	 and	 had	 shot himself	 in	 the	 hand.	 Of	 course,	 Issy	 was	 at	 once	 under	 suspicion	 of	 a	 self-inflicted	 wound,	 which	 is	 one	 of	 the	 worst	 crimes	 in	 the	 calendar.	 But	 the suspicion	was	removed	instantly.	Issy	was	hopping	around,	raising	a	terrific	row.

"Oi,	 oi,"	 he	 wailed.	 "I'm	 ruint.	 I'm	 ruint.	 My	 thimble	 finger	 is	 gone.	 My thimble	finger!	I'm	ruint.	Oi,	oi,	oi,	oi."

The	 poor	 fellow	 was	 so	 sincerely	 desolated	 over	 the	 loss	 of	 his	 necessary finger	 that	 I	 couldn't	 accuse	 him	 of	 shooting	 himself	 intentionally.	 I	 detailed	 a man	 named	 Bealer	 to	 take	 Issy	 back	 to	 a	 dressing	 station.	 Well,	 Bealer	 never

came	back.

Months	 later	 in	 England	 I	 met	 up	 with	 Epstein	 and	 asked	 about	 Bealer.	 It seems	that	after	Issy	had	been	fixed	up,	the	surgeon	turned	to	Bealer	and	said:

"What's	the	matter	with	you?"

Bealer	happened	to	be	dreaming	of	something	else	and	didn't	answer.

"I	say,"	barked	the	doctor,	"speak	up.	What's	wrong?"

Bealer	was	startled	and	jumped	and	begun	to	stutter.

"Oh,	I	see,"	said	the	surgeon.	"Shell	shock."

Bealer	was	bright	enough	and	quick	enough	after	that	to	play	it	up	and	was

tagged	for	Blighty.	He	had	it	thrust	upon	him.	And	you	can	bet	he	grabbed	it	and thanked	his	lucky	stars.

We	 had	 been	 on	 Mill	 Street	 a	 day	 and	 a	 night	 when	 an	 order	 came	 for	 our company	 to	 move	 up	 to	 the	 second	 line	 and	 to	 be	 ready	 to	 go	 over	 the	 top	 the next	day.	At	first	there	was	the	usual	grousing,	as	there	seemed	to	be	no	reason why	our	company	should	be	picked	from	the	whole	battalion.	We	soon	learned

that	all	hands	were	going	over,	and	after	that	we	felt	better.

We	got	our	equipment	on	and	started	up	to	the	second	line.	It	was	right	here

that	I	got	my	first	dose	of	real	honest-to-goodness	modern	war.	The	big	push	had been	 on	 all	 summer,	 and	 the	 whole	 of	 the	 Somme	 district	 was	 battered	 and smashed.

Going	up	from	Mill	Street	there	were	no	communication	trenches.	We	were

right	out	in	the	open,	exposed	to	rifle	and	machine-gun	fire	and	to	shrapnel,	and the	Boches	were	fairly	raining	it	in	on	the	territory	they	had	been	pushed	back

from	and	of	which	they	had	the	range	to	an	inch.	We	went	up	under	that	steady

fire	for	a	full	hour.	The	casualties	were	heavy,	and	the	galling	part	of	it	was	that we	 couldn't	 hurry,	 it	 was	 so	 dark.	 Every	 time	 a	 shell	 burst	 overhead	 and	 the shrapnel	pattered	in	the	dirt	all	about,	I	kissed	myself	good-by	and	thought	of	the baked	beans	at	home.	Men	kept	falling,	and	I	wished	I	hadn't	enlisted.

When	we	finally	got	up	to	the	trench,	believe	me,	we	didn't	need	any	orders

to	get	in.	We	relieved	the	Black	Watch,	and	they	encouraged	us	by	telling	us	they had	lost	over	half	their	men	in	that	trench,	and	that	Fritz	kept	a	constant	fire	on

it.	They	didn't	need	to	tell	us.	The	big	boys	were	coming	over	all	the	time.

The	 dead	 here	 were	 enough	 to	 give	 you	 the	 horrors.	 I	 had	 never	 seen	 so many	before	and	never	saw	so	many	afterwards	in	one	place.	They	were	all	over

the	 place,	 both	 Germans	 and	 our	 own	 men.	 And	 in	 all	 states	 of	 mutilation	 and decomposition.

There	were	arms	and	legs	sticking	out	of	the	trench	sides.	You	could	tell	their

nationality	by	the	uniforms.	The	Scotch	predominated.	And	their	dead	lay	in	the

trenches	and	outside	and	hanging	over	the	edges.	I	think	it	was	here	that	I	first got	the	real	meaning	of	that	old	quotation	about	the	curse	of	a	dead	man's	eye.

With	so	many	lying	about,	there	were	always	eyes	staring	at	you.

Sometimes	a	particularly	wide-staring	corpse	would	seem	to	follow	you	with

his	 gaze,	 like	 one	 of	 these	 posters	 with	 the	 pointing	 finger	 that	 they	 use	 to advertise	Liberty	Bonds.	We	would	cover	them	up	or	turn	them	over.	Here	and

there	 one	 would	 have	 a	 scornful	 death	 smile	 on	 his	 lips,	 as	 though	 he	 were laughing	at	the	folly	of	the	whole	thing.

The	 stench	 here	 was	 appalling.	 That	 frightful,	 sickening	 smell	 that	 strikes one	in	the	face	like	something	tangible.	Ugh!	I	immediately	grew	dizzy	and	faint and	 had	 a	 mad	 desire	 to	 run.	 I	 think	 if	 I	 hadn't	 been	 a	 non-com	 with	 a	 certain small	amount	of	responsibility	to	live	up	to,	I	should	have	gone	crazy.

I	 managed	 to	 pull	 myself	 together	 and	 placed	 my	 men	 as	 comfortably	 as possible.	 The	 Germans	 were	 five	 hundred	 yards	 away,	 and	 there	 was	 but	 little danger	of	an	attack,	so	comparatively	few	had	to	"stand	to."	The	rest	took	to	the shelters.

I	found	a	little	two-man	shelter	that	everybody	else	had	avoided	and	crawled

in.	I	crowded	up	against	a	man	in	there	and	spoke	to	him.	He	didn't	answer	and

then	suddenly	I	became	aware	of	a	stench	more	powerful	than	ordinary.	I	put	out

my	hand	and	thrust	it	into	a	slimy,	cold	mess.	I	had	found	a	dead	German	with	a

gaping,	putrefying	wound	in	his	abdomen.	I	crawled	out	of	that	shelter,	gagging

and	retching.	This	time	I	simply	couldn't	smother	my	impulse	to	run,	and	run	I

did,	 into	 the	 next	 traverse,	 where	 I	 sank	 weak	 and	 faint	 on	 the	 fire	 step.	 I	 sat there	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 night,	 regardless	 of	 shells,	 my	 mind	 milling	 wildly	 on	 the problem	of	war	and	the	reason	thereof	and	cursing	myself	for	a	fool.

It	 was	 very	 early	 in	 the	 morning	 when	 Wells	 shook	 me	 up	 with,	 "Hi	 sye, Darby,	wot	the	blinkin'	blazes	is	that	noise?"

We	 listened,	 and	 away	 from	 the	 rear	 came	 a	 tremendous	 whirring,	 burring, rumbling	 buzz,	 like	 a	 swarm	 of	 giant	 bees.	 I	 thought	 of	 everything	 from	 a Zeppelin	 to	 a	 donkey	 engine	 but	 couldn't	 make	 it	 out.	 Blofeld	 ran	 around	 the corner	 of	 a	 traverse	 and	 told	 us	 to	 get	 the	 men	 out.	 He	 didn't	 know	 what	 was coming	and	wasn't	taking	any	chances.

It	was	getting	a	little	light	though	heavily	misty.	We	waited,	and	then	out	of

the	gray	blanket	of	fog	waddled	the	great	steel	monsters	that	we	were	to	know

afterwards	as	the	"tanks."	I	shall	never	forget	it.

Head-on	View	of	a	British	Tank

In	 the	 half	 darkness	 they	 looked	 twice	 as	 big	 as	 they	 really	 were.	 They lurched	forward,	slow,	clumsy	but	irresistible,	nosing	down	into	shell	holes	and out,	 crushing	 the	 unburied	 dead,	 sliding	 over	 mere	 trenches	 as	 though	 they	 did not	exist.

There	 were	 five	 in	 all.	 One	 passed	 directly	 over	 us.	 We	 scuttled	 out	 of	 the way,	and	the	men	let	go	a	cheer.	For	we	knew	that	here	was	something	that	could

and	would	win	battles.

The	tanks	were	an	absolutely	new	thing	to	us.	Their	secret	had	been	guarded

so	carefully	even	in	our	own	army	that	our	battalion	had	heard	nothing	of	them.

But	 we	 didn't	 need	 to	 be	 told	 that	 they	 would	 be	 effective.	 One	 look	 was enough	to	convince	us.	Later	it	convinced	Fritzie.





CHAPTER	X

FOLLOWING	THE	TANKS	INTO	BATTLE

The	 tanks	 passed	 beyond	 us	 and	 half-way	 up	 to	 the	 first	 line	 and	 stopped.

Trapdoors	 in	 the	 decks	 opened,	 and	 the	 crews	 poured	 out	 and	 began	 to	 pile sandbags	 in	 front	 of	 the	 machines	 so	 that	 when	 day	 broke	 fully	 and	 the	 mists lifted,	the	enemy	could	not	see	what	had	been	brought	up	in	the	night.

Day	 dawned,	 and	 a	 frisky	 little	 breeze	 from	 the	 west	 scattered	 the	 fog	 and swept	the	sky	clean.	There	wasn't	a	cloud	by	eight	o'clock.	The	sun	shone	bright, and	we	cursed	it,	for	if	it	had	been	rainy	the	attack	would	not	have	been	made.

We	made	the	usual	last	preparations	that	morning,	such	as	writing	letters	and

delivering	 farewell	 messages;	 and	 the	 latest	 rooks	 made	 their	 wills	 in	 the	 little blanks	provided	for	the	purpose	in	the	back	of	the	pay	books.	We	judged	from

the	number	of	dead	and	the	evident	punishment	other	divisions	had	taken	there

that	 the	 chances	 of	 coming	 back	 would	 be	 slim.	 Around	 nine	 o'clock	 Captain Green	gave	us	a	little	talk	that	confirmed	our	suspicions	that	the	day	was	to	be	a hard	one.

He	said,	as	nearly	as	I	can	remember:

"Lads,	I	want	to	tell	you	that	there	is	to	be	a	most	important	battle—one	of the	most	important	in	the	whole	war.	High	Wood	out	there	commands	a	view	of

the	whole	of	this	part	of	the	Somme	and	is	most	valuable.	There	are	estimated	to be	 about	 ten	 thousand	 Germans	 in	 that	 wood	 and	 in	 the	 surrounding	 supports.

The	 positions	 are	 mostly	 of	 concrete	 with	 hundreds	 of	 machine	 guns	 and	 field artillery.	 Our	 heavies	 have	 for	 some	 reason	 made	 no	 impression	 on	 them,	 and regiment	 after	 regiment	 has	 attempted	 to	 take	 the	 woods	 and	 failed	 with	 heavy losses.	Now	it	is	up	to	the	47th	Division	to	do	the	seemingly	impossible.	Zero	is at	eleven.	We	go	over	then.	The	best	of	luck	and	God	bless	you."

We	were	all	feeling	pretty	sour	on	the	world	when	the	sky	pilot	came	along

and	cheered	us	up.

He	was	a	good	little	man,	that	chaplain,	brave	as	they	make	'em.	He	always

went	 over	 the	 top	 with	 us	 and	 was	 in	 the	 thick	 of	 the	 fighting,	 and	 he	 had	 the

military	cross	for	bravery.	He	passed	down	the	line,	giving	us	a	slap	on	the	back or	 a	 hand	 grip	 and	 started	 us	 singing.	 No	 gospel	 hymns	 either,	 but	 any	 old rollicking,	 good-natured	 song	 that	 he	 happened	 to	 think	 of	 that	 would	 loosen things	up	and	relieve	the	tension.

Somehow	he	made	you	feel	that	you	wouldn't	mind	going	to	hell	if	he	was

along,	 and	 you	 knew	 that	 he'd	 be	 willing	 to	 come	 if	 he	 could	 do	 any	 good.	 A good	little	man!	Peace	to	his	ashes.

At	 ten	 o'clock	 things	 busted	 loose,	 and	 the	 most	 intense	 bombardment	 ever known	 in	 warfare	 up	 to	 that	 time	 began.	 Thousands	 of	 guns,	 both	 French	 and English,	in	fact	every	available	gun	within	a	radius	of	fifteen	miles,	poured	it	in.

In	the	Bedlamitish	din	and	roar	it	was	impossible	to	hear	the	next	man	unless	he put	his	mouth	up	close	to	your	ear	and	yelled.

My	 ear	 drums	 ached,	 and	 I	 thought	 I	 should	 go	 insane	 if	 the	 racket	 didn't stop.	I	was	frightfully	nervous	and	scared,	but	tried	not	to	show	it.	An	officer	or a	non-com	must	conceal	his	nervousness,	though	he	be	dying	with	fright.

The	faces	of	the	men	were	hard-set	and	pale.	Some	of	them	looked	positively

green.	They	smoked	fag	after	fag,	lighting	the	new	ones	on	the	butts.

All	through	the	bombardment	Fritz	was	comparatively	quiet.	He	was	saving

all	his	for	the	time	when	we	should	come	over.	Probably,	too,	he	was	holed	up	to a	large	extent	in	his	concrete	dug-outs.	I	looked	over	the	top	once	or	twice	and wondered	 if	 I,	 too,	 would	 be	 lying	 there	 unburied	 with	 the	 rats	 and	 maggots gnawing	 me	 into	 an	 unrecognizable	 mass.	 There	 were	 moments	 in	 that	 hour from	ten	to	eleven	when	I	was	distinctly	sorry	for	myself.

The	 time,	 strangely	 enough,	 went	 fast—as	 it	 probably	 does	 with	 a

condemned	man	in	his	last	hour.	At	zero	minus	ten	the	word	went	down	the	line

"Ten	 to	 go"	 and	 we	 got	 to	 the	 better	 positions	 of	 the	 trench	 and	 secured	 our footing	on	the	side	of	the	parapet	to	make	our	climb	over	when	the	signal	came.

Some	 of	 the	 men	 gave	 their	 bayonets	 a	 last	 fond	 rub,	 and	 I	 looked	 to	 my	 bolt action	to	see	that	it	worked	well.	I	had	ten	rounds	in	the	magazine,	and	I	didn't intend	to	rely	too	much	on	the	bayonet.	At	a	few	seconds	of	eleven	I	looked	at

my	 wrist	 watch	 and	 was	 afflicted	 again	 with	 that	 empty	 feeling	 in	 the	 solar plexus.	Then	the	whistles	shrilled;	I	blew	mine,	and	over	we	went.

To	 a	 disinterested	 spectator	 who	 was	 far	 enough	 up	 in	 the	 air	 to	 be	 out	 of range	it	must	have	been	a	wonderful	spectacle	to	see	those	thousands	of	men	go

over,	wave	after	wave.

The	terrain	was	level	out	to	the	point	where	the	little	hill	of	High	Wood	rose

covered	with	the	splintered	poles	of	what	had	once	been	a	forest.	This	position

and	the	supports	to	the	left	and	rear	of	it	began	to	fairly	belch	machine-gun	and shell	fire.	If	Fritz	had	been	quiet	before,	he	gave	us	all	he	had	now.

Our	battalion	went	over	from	the	second	trench,	and	we	got	the	cream	of	it.

The	 tanks	 were	 just	 ahead	 of	 us	 and	 lumbered	 along	 in	 an	 imposing	 row.

They	lurched	down	into	deep	craters	and	out	again,	tipped	and	reeled	and	listed, and	sometimes	seemed	as	though	they	must	upset;	but	they	came	up	each	time

and	went	on	and	on.	And	how	slow	they	did	seem	to	move!	Lord,	I	thought	we

should	never	cover	that	five	or	six	hundred	yards.

The	 tank	 machine	 guns	 were	 spitting	 fire	 over	 the	 heads	 of	 our	 first	 wave, and	their	Hotchkiss	guns	were	rattling.	A	beautiful	creeping	barrage	preceded	us.

Row	 after	 row	 of	 shells	 burst	 at	 just	 the	 right	 distance	 ahead,	 spewing	 gobs	 of smoke	 and	 flashes	 of	 flame,	 made	 thin	 by	 the	 bright	 sunlight.	 Half	 a	 dozen airplanes	circled	like	dragonflies	up	there	in	the	blue.

There	was	a	tank	just	ahead	of	me.	I	got	behind	it.	And	marched	there.	Slow!

God,	 how	 slow!	 Anyhow,	 it	 kept	 off	 the	 machine-gun	 bullets,	 but	 not,	 the shrapnel.	 It	 was	 breaking	 over	 us	 in	 clouds.	 I	 felt	 the	 stunning	 patter	 of	 the fragments	on	my	tin	hat,	cringed	under	it,	and	wondered	vaguely	why	it	didn't	do me	in.

Men	in	the	front	wave	were	going	down	like	tenpins.	Off	there	diagonally	to

the	 right	 and	 forward	 I	 glimpsed	 a	 blinding	 burst,	 and	 as	 much	 as	 a	 whole platoon	went	down.

Around	 me	 men	 were	 dropping	 all	 the	 time—men	 I	 knew.	 I	 saw	 Dolbsie

clawing	at	his	throat	as	he	reeled	forward,	falling.	I	saw	Vickers	double	up,	drop his	rifle,	and	somersault,	hanging	on	to	his	abdomen.

A	 hundred	 yards	 away,	 to	 the	 right,	 an	 officer	 walked	 backwards	 with	 an automatic	 pistol	 balanced	 on	 his	 finger,	 smiling,	 pulling	 his	 men	 along	 like	 a drum	major.	A	shell	or	something	hit	him.	He	disappeared	in	a	welter	of	blood

and	half	a	dozen	of	the	front	file	fell	with	him.

I	thought	we	must	be	nearly	there	and	sneaked	a	look	around	the	edge	of	the

tank.	 A	 traversing	 machine	 gun	 raked	 the	 mud,	 throwing	 up	 handfuls,	 and	 I

heard	 the	 gruff	 "row,	 row"	 of	 flattened	 bullets	 as	 they	 ricocheted	 off	 the	 steel armor.	I	ducked	back,	and	on	we	went.

Slow!	Slow!	I	found	myself	planning	what	I	would	do	when	I	got	to	the	front

trenches—if	we	ever	did.	There	would	be	a	grand	rumpus,	and	I	would	click	a

dozen	or	more.

And	then	we	arrived.

I	 don't	 suppose	 that	 trip	 across	 No	 Man's	 Land	 behind	 the	 tanks	 took	 over five	minutes,	but	it	seemed	like	an	hour.

At	 the	 end	 of	 it	 my	 participation	 in	 the	 battle	 of	 High	 Wood	 ended.	 No,	 I wasn't	wounded.	But	when	we	reached	the	Boche	front	trenches	a	strange	thing

happened.	 There	 was	 no	 fight	 worth	 mentioning.	 The	 tanks	 stopped	 over	 the trenches	and	blazed	away	right	and	left	with	their	all-around	traverse.

A	few	Boches	ran	out	and	threw	silly	little	bombs	at	the	monsters.	The	tanks,

noses	 in	 air,	 moved	 slowly	 on.	 And	 then	 the	 Graybacks	 swarmed	 up	 out	 of shelters	 and	 dug-outs,	 literally	 in	 hundreds,	 and	 held	 up	 their	 hands,	 whining

"Mercy,	kamarad."

We	took	prisoners	by	platoons.	Blofeld	grabbed	me	and	turned	over	a	gang

of	thirty	to	me.	We	searched	them	rapidly,	cut	their	suspenders	and	belts,	and	I started	to	the	rear	with	them.	They	seemed	glad	to	go.	So	was	I.

As	 we	 hurried	 back	 over	 the	 five	 hundred	 yards	 that	 had	 been	 No	 Man's Land	and	was	now	British	ground,	I	looked	back	and	saw	the	irresistible	tanks

smashing	 their	 way	 through	 the	 tree	 stumps	 of	 High	 Wood,	 still	 spitting	 death and	destruction	in	three	directions.

Going	back	we	were	under	almost	as	heavy	fire	as	we	had	been	coming	up.

When	we	were	about	half-way	across,	shrapnel	burst	directly	over	our	party	and

seven	 of	 the	 prisoners	 were	 killed	 and	 half	 a	 dozen	 wounded.	 I	 myself	 was unscratched.	I	stuck	my	hand	inside	my	tunic	and	patted	Dinky	on	the	back,	sent

up	a	prayer	for	some	more	luck	like	that,	and	carried	on.

After	getting	my	prisoners	back	to	the	rear,	I	came	up	again	but	couldn't	find

my	 battalion.	 I	 threw	 in	 with	 a	 battalion	 of	 Australians	 and	 was	 with	 them	 for twenty-four	hours.

When	I	found	my	chaps	again,	the	battle	of	High	Wood	was	pretty	well	over.

Our	company	for	some	reason	had	suffered	very	few	casualties,	less	than	twenty-nine.	 Company	 B,	 however,	 had	 been	 practically	 wiped	 out,	 losing	 all	 but thirteen	 men	 out	 of	 two	 hundred.	 The	 other	 two	 companies	 had	 less	 than	 one hundred	 casualties.	 We	 had	 lost	 about	 a	 third	 of	 our	 strength.	 It	 is	 a	 living wonder	to	me	that	any	of	us	came	through.

I	don't	believe	any	of	us	would	have	if	it	hadn't	been	for	the	tanks.

The	net	result	of	the	battle	of	High	Wood	was	that	our	troops	carried	on	for

nearly	two	miles	beyond	the	position	to	be	taken.	They	had	to	fall	back	but	held the	wood	and	the	heights.	Three	of	the	tanks	were	stalled	in	the	farther	edge	of the	woods—out	of	fuel—and	remained	there	for	three	days	unharmed	under	the

fire	of	the	German	guns.

Eventually	 some	 one	 ventured	 out	 and	 got	 some	 juice	 into	 them,	 and	 they returned	 to	 our	 lines.	 The	 tanks	 had	 proved	 themselves,	 not	 only	 as	 effective fighting	machines,	but	as	destroyers	of	German	morale.





CHAPTER	XI

PRISONERS

For	weeks	after	our	first	introduction	to	the	tanks	they	were	the	chief	topic	of conversation	in	our	battalion.	And,	notwithstanding	the	fact	that	we	had	seen	the monsters	 go	 into	 action,	 had	 seen	 what	 they	 did	 and	 the	 effect	 they	 had	 on	 the Boche,	the	details	of	their	building	and	of	their	mechanism	remained	a	mystery

for	a	long	time.

For	 weeks	 about	 all	 we	 knew	 about	 them	 was	 what	 we	 gathered	 from	 their appearance	 as	 they	 reeled	 along,	 camouflaged	 with	 browns	 and	 yellows	 like great	 toads,	 and	 that	 they	 were	 named	 with	 quaint	 names	 like	 "Creme	 de Menthe"	and	"Diplodocus."

Eventually	I	met	with	a	member	of	the	crews	who	had	manned	the	tanks	at

the	battle	of	High	Wood,	and	I	obtained	from	him	a	description	of	some	of	his

sensations.	It	was	a	thing	we	had	all	wondered	about,—how	the	men	inside	felt

as	they	went	over.

My	tanker	was	a	young	fellow	not	over	twenty-five,	a	machine	gunner,	and

in	a	little	 estaminet,	over	a	glass	of	citron	and	soda,	he	told	me	of	his	first	battle.

"Before	we	went	in,"	he	said,	"I	was	a	little	bit	uncertain	as	to	how	we	were coming	out.	We	had	tried	the	old	boats	out	and	had	given	them	every	reasonable

test.	We	knew	how	much	they	would	stand	in	the	way	of	shells	on	top	and	in	the

way	 of	 bombs	 or	 mines	 underneath.	 Still	 there	 was	 all	 the	 difference	 between rehearsal	and	the	actual	going	on	the	stage.

"When	we	crawled	in	through	the	trapdoor	for	the	first	time	over,	the	shut-up feeling	got	me.	I'd	felt	it	before	but	not	that	way.	I	got	to	imagining	what	would happen	 if	 we	 got	 stalled	 somewhere	 in	 the	 Boche	 lines,	 and	 they	 built	 a	 fire around	 us.	 That	 was	 natural,	 because	 it's	 hot	 inside	 a	 tank	 at	 the	 best.	 You mustn't	smoke	either.	I	hadn't	minded	that	in	rehearsal,	but	in	action	I	was	crazy for	a	fag.

"We	went	across,	you	remember,	at	eleven,	and	the	sun	was	shining	bright.

We	were	parboiled	before	we	started,	and	when	we	got	going	good	it	was	like	a

Turkish	 bath.	 I	 was	 stripped	 to	 the	 waist	 and	 was	 dripping.	 Besides	 that,	 when we	begun	to	give	'em	hell,	the	place	filled	with	gas,	and	it	was	stifling.	The	old boat	pitched	a	good	deal	going	into	shell	holes,	and	it	was	all	a	man	could	do	to keep	his	station.	I	put	my	nose	up	to	my	loop-hole	to	get	air,	but	only	once.	The machine-gun	bullets	were	simply	rattling	on	our	hide.	Tock,	tock,	tock	they	kept drumming.	 The	 first	 shell	 that	 hit	 us	 must	 have	 been	 head	 on	 and	 a	 direct	 hit.

There	 was	 a	 terrific	 crash,	 and	 the	 old	 girl	 shook	 all	 over,—seemed	 to	 pause	 a little	even.	But	no	harm	was	done.	After	that	we	breathed	easier.	We	hadn't	been quite	sure	that	the	Boche	shells	wouldn't	do	us	in.

"By	the	time	we	got	to	the	Boche	trenches,	we	knew	he	hadn't	anything	that

could	hurt	us.	We	just	sat	and	raked	him	and	laughed	and	wished	it	was	over,	so

we	could	get	the	air."

I	 had	 already	 seen	 the	 effect	 of	 the	 tanks	 on	 the	 Germans.	 The	 batch	 of prisoners	 who	 had	 been	 turned	 over	 to	 me	 seemed	 dazed.	 One	 who	 spoke English	said	in	a	quavering	voice:

"Gott	 in	 Himmel,	 Kamarad,	 how	 could	 one	 endure?	 These	 things	 are	 not human.	They	are	not	fair."

That	"fair"	thing	made	a	hit	with	me	after	going	against	tear	gas	and	hearing about	liquid	fire	and	such	things.

The	great	number	of	the	prisoners	we	took	at	High	Wood	were	very	scared

looking	at	first	and	very	surly.	They	apparently	expected	to	be	badly	treated	and perhaps	tortured.	They	were	tractable	enough	for	the	most	part.	But	they	needed

watching,	and	they	got	it	from	me,	as	I	had	heard	much	of	the	treachery	of	the

Boche	prisoners.

On	 the	 way	 to	 the	 rear	 with	 my	 bunch,	 I	 ran	 into	 a	 little	 episode	 which showed	the	foolishness	of	trusting	a	German,—particularly	an	officer.

I	was	herding	my	lot	along	when	we	came	up	with	about	twelve	in	charge	of

a	young	fellow	from	a	Leicester	regiment.	He	was	a	private,	and	as	most	of	his

non-commissioned	 officers	 had	 been	 put	 out	 of	 action,	 he	 was	 acting	 corporal.

We	 were	 walking	 together	 behind	 the	 prisoners,	 swapping	 notes	 on	 the	 fight, when	one	of	his	stopped,	and	no	amount	of	coaxing	would	induce	him	to	go	any

farther.	He	was	an	officer,	of	what	rank	I	don't	know,	but	judging	from	his	age

probably	a	lieutenant.

Finally	 Crane—that	 was	 the	 Leicester	 chap—went	 up	 to	 the	 officer, threatened	him	with	his	bayonet,	and	let	him	know	that	he	was	due	for	the	cold

steel	if	he	didn't	get	up	and	hike.

Whereupon	Mr.	Fritz	pulled	an	automatic	from	under	his	coat—he	evidently

had	not	been	carefully	searched—and	aimed	it	at	Crane.	Crane	dove	at	him	and

grabbed	his	wrist,	but	was	too	late.	The	gun	went	off	and	tore	away	Crane's	right cheek.	He	didn't	go	down,	however,	and	before	I	could	get	in	without	danger	to

Crane,	he	polished	off	the	officer	on	the	spot.

The	 prisoners	 looked	 almost	 pleased.	 I	 suppose	 they	 knew	 the	 officer	 too well.	I	bandaged	Crane	and	offered	to	take	his	prisoners	in,	but	he	insisted	upon carrying	on.	He	got	very	weak	from	loss	of	blood	after	a	bit,	and	I	had	two	of	the Boches	carry	him	to	the	nearest	dressing	station,	where	they	took	care	of	him.	I have	often	wondered	whether	the	poor	chap	"clicked"	it.

Eventually	I	got	my	batch	of	prisoners	back	to	headquarters	and	turned	them

over.	I	want	to	say	a	word	right	here	as	to	the	treatment	of	the	German	prisoners by	the	British.	In	spite	of	the	verified	stories	of	the	brutality	shown	to	the	Allied prisoners	 by	 the	 Hun,	 the	 English	 and	 French	 have	 too	 much	 humanity	 to retaliate.	 Time	 and	 again	 I	 have	 seen	 British	 soldiers	 who	 were	 bringing	 in Germans	 stop	 and	 spend	 their	 own	 scanty	 pocket	 money	 for	 their	 captives'

comfort.	I	have	done	it	myself.

Almost	 inevitably	 the	 Boche	 prisoners	 were	 expecting	 harsh	 treatment.	 I found	several	who	said	that	they	had	been	told	by	their	officers	that	they	would be	 skinned	 alive	 if	 they	 surrendered	 to	 the	 English.	 They	 believed	 it,	 and	 you could	hardly	blame	the	poor	devils	for	being	scared.

Whenever	we	were	taking	prisoners	back,	we	always,	unless	we	were	in	too

much	of	a	hurry,	took	them	to	the	nearest	canteen	run	by	the	Y.M.C.A.	or	by	one

of	 the	 artillery	 companies,	 and	 here	 we	 would	 buy	 English	 or	 American	 fags.

And	believe	me,	they	liked	them.	Any	one	who	has	smoked	the	tobacco	issued	to

the	 German	 army	 could	 almost	 understand	 a	 soldier	 surrendering	 just	 to	 get away	from	it.

Usually,	 too,	 we	 bought	 bread	 and	 sweets,	 if	 we	 could	 stand	 the	 price.	 The Heinies	would	bolt	the	food	down	as	though	they	were	half	starved.	And	it	was

perfectly	clear	from	the	way	they	went	after	the	luxuries	that	they	got	little	more than	the	hard	necessities	of	army	fare.

At	the	battle	of	High	Wood	the	prisoners	we	took	ran	largely	to	very	young fellows	and	to	men	of	fifty	or	over.	Some	of	the	youngsters	said	they	were	only

seventeen	and	they	looked	not	over	fifteen.	Many	of	them	had	never	shaved.

I	think	the	sight	of	those	war-worn	boys,	haggard	and	hard,	already	touched

with	cruelty	and	blood	lust,	brought	home	to	me	closer	than	ever	before	what	a

hellish	thing	war	is,	and	how	keenly	Germany	must	be	suffering,	along	with	the

rest	of	us.





CHAPTER	XII

I	BECOME	A	BOMBER

When	I	found	my	battalion,	the	battle	of	High	Wood	had	pretty	well	quieted

down.	We	had	taken	the	position	we	went	after,	and	the	fighting	was	going	on	to

the	 north	 and	 beyond	 the	 Wood.	 The	 Big	 Push	 progressed	 very	 rapidly	 as	 the summer	drew	to	a	close.	Our	men	were	holding	one	of	the	captured	positions	in

the	neighborhood	of	the	Wood.

It	 must	 have	 been	 two	 days	 after	 we	 went	 over	 the	 top	 with	 the	 tanks	 that Captain	 Green	 had	 me	 up	 and	 told	 me	 that	 I	 was	 promoted.	 At	 least	 that	 was what	he	called	it.	I	differed	with	him,	but	didn't	say	so.

The	Captain	said	that	as	I	had	had	a	course	in	bombing,	he	thought	he	would

put	me	in	the	Battalion	Bombers.

I	 protested	 that	 the	 honor	 was	 too	 great	 and	 that	 I	 really	 didn't	 think	 I	 was good	enough.

After	that	the	Captain	said	that	he	didn't	 think	I	was	going	in	the	bombers.	He knew	it.	I	was	elected!

I	didn't	take	any	joy	whatever	in	the	appointment,	but	orders	are	orders	and

they	have	to	be	obeyed.	The	bombers	are	called	the	"Suicide	Club"	and	are	well named.	The	mortality	in	this	branch	of	the	service	is	as	great	if	not	greater	than in	any	other.

In	spite	of	my	feelings	in	the	matter,	I	accepted	the	decision	cheerfully—like

a	 man	 being	 sentenced	 to	 be	 electrocuted—and	 managed	 to	 convey	 the

impression	to	Captain	Green	that	I	was	greatly	elated	and	that	I	looked	forward

to	future	performances	with	large	relish.	After	that	I	went	back	to	my	shelter	and made	a	new	will.

That	 very	 night	 I	 was	 called	 upon	 to	 take	 charge	 of	 a	 bombing	 party	 of twelve	men.	A	lieutenant,	Mr.	May,	one	of	the	bravest	men	I	ever	knew,	was	to

be	of	the	party	and	in	direct	command.	I	was	to	have	the	selection	of	the	men.

Captain	 Green	 had	 me	 up	 along	 with	 Lieutenant	 May	 early	 in	 the	 evening,

and	as	nearly	as	I	can	remember	these	were	his	instructions:

"Just	beyond	High	Wood	and	to	the	left	there	is	a	sap	or	small	trench	leading to	 the	 sunken	 road	 that	 lies	 between	 the	 towns	 of	 Albert	 and	 Bapaume.	 That position	commands	a	military	point	that	we	find	necessary	to	hold	before	we	can

make	 another	 attack.	 The	 Germans	 are	 in	 the	 trench.	 They	 have	 two	 machine guns	and	will	raise	the	devil	with	us	unless	we	get	them	out.	It	will	cost	a	good many	 lives	 if	 we	 attempt	 to	 take	 the	 position	 by	 attack,	 but	 we	 are	 under	 the impression	that	a	bombing	party	in	the	night	on	a	surprise	attack	will	be	able	to take	it	with	little	loss	of	life.	Take	your	twelve	men	out	there	at	ten	o'clock	and take	that	trench!	You	will	take	only	bombs	with	you.	You	and	Mr.	May	will	have revolvers.	After	taking	the	trench,	consolidate	it,	and	before	morning	there	will be	relief	sent	out	to	you.	The	best	of	luck!'"

The	whole	thing	sounded	as	simple	as	ABC.	All	we	had	to	do	was	go	over

there	and	take	the	place.	The	captain	didn't	say	how	many	Germans	there	would

be	 nor	 what	 they	 would	 be	 doing	 while	 we	 were	 taking	 their	 comfortable	 little position.	 Indeed	 he	 seemed	 to	 quite	 carelessly	 leave	 the	 Boche	 out	 of	 the reckoning.	I	didn't.	I	knew	that	some	of	us,	and	quite	probably	most	of	us,	would never	come	back.

I	 selected	 my	 men	 carefully,	 taking	 only	 the	 coolest	 and	 steadiest	 and	 the best	 bombers.	 Most	 of	 them	 were	 men	 who	 had	 been	 at	 Dover	 with	 me.	 I	 felt like	an	executioner	when	I	notified	them	of	their	selection.

At	nine-thirty	we	were	ready,	stripped	to	the	lightest	of	necessary	equipment.

Each	 of	 the	 men	 was	 armed	 with	 a	 bucket	 of	 bombs.	 Some	 carried	 an	 extra supply	in	satchels,	so	we	knew	there	would	be	no	shortage	of	Millses.

Lieutenant	May	took	us	out	over	the	top	on	schedule	time,	and	we	started	for

the	position	to	be	taken.	We	walked	erect	but	in	the	strictest	silence	for	about	a thousand	yards.	At	that	time	the	distances	were	great	on	the	Somme,	as	the	Big

Push	was	in	full	swing,	and	the	advance	had	been	fast.	Trench	systems	had	been

demolished,	and	in	many	places	there	were	only	shell	holes	and	isolated	pieces

of	 trench	 defended	 by	 machine	 guns.	 The	 whole	 movement	 had	 progressed	 so far	that	the	lines	were	far	apart	and	broken,	so	much	so	that	in	many	cases	the

fighting	had	come	back	to	the	open	work	of	early	in	the	war.

Poking	along	out	there,	I	had	the	feeling	that	we	were	an	awfully	long	way

from	 the	 comparative	 safety	 of	 our	 main	 body—too	 far	 away	 for	 comfort.	 We were.	Any	doubts	on	the	matter	disappeared	before	morning.

At	the	end	of	the	thousand	yards	Lieutenant	May	gave	the	signal	to	lie	down.

We	lay	still	half	an	hour	or	so	and	then	crawled	forward.	Fortunately	there	was

no	 barbed	 wire,	 as	 all	 entanglements	 had	 been	 destroyed	 by	 the	 terrific bombardment	that	had	been	going	on	for	weeks.	The	Germans	made	no	attempt

to	repair	it	nor	did	we.

We	crawled	along	for	about	ten	minutes,	and	the	Lieutenant	passed	the	word

in	whispers	to	get	ready,	as	we	were	nearly	on	them.	Each	of	us	got	out	a	bomb,

pulled	the	pin	with	our	teeth,	and	waited	for	the	signal.	It	was	fairly	still.	Away off	to	the	rear,	guns	were	going,	but	they	seemed	a	long	way	off.	Forward,	and

away	off	to	the	right	beyond	the	Wood,	there	was	a	lot	of	rifle	and	machine-gun

fire,	and	we	could	see	the	sharp	little	lavender	stabs	of	flame	like	electric	flashes.

It	was	light	enough	so	that	we	could	see	dimly.

Just	 ahead	 we	 could	 hear	 the	 murmur	 of	 the	 Huns	 as	 they	 chatted	 in	 the trench.	They	hadn't	seen	us.	Evidently	they	didn't	suspect	and	were	more	or	less careless.

The	 Lieutenant	 waited	 until	 the	 sound	 of	 voices	 was	 a	 little	 louder	 than before,	the	Boches	evidently	being	engaged	in	a	fireside	argument	of	some	kind,

and	then	he	jumped	to	his	feet	shouting,	"Now	then,	my	lads.	All	together!"

We	came	up	all	standing	and	let	'em	go.	It	was	about	fifteen	yards	to	Fritz,

and	 that	 is	 easy	 to	 a	 good	 bomber,	 as	 my	 men	 all	 were.	 A	 yell	 of	 surprise	 and fright	went	up	from	the	trench,	and	they	started	to	run.	We	spread	out	so	as	to	get room,	gave	them	another	round	of	Millses,	and	rushed.

The	trench	wasn't	really	a	trench	at	all.	It	was	the	remains	of	a	perfectly	good one,	but	had	been	bashed	all	to	pieces,	and	was	now	only	five	or	six	shell	craters connected	by	the	ruined	traverses.	At	no	point	was	it	more	than	waist	high	and	in some	 places	 only	 knee	 high.	 We	 swarmed	 into	 what	 was	 left	 of	 the	 trench	 and after	 the	 Heinies.	 There	 must	 have	 been	 forty	 of	 them,	 and	 it	 didn't	 take	 them long	to	find	out	that	we	were	only	a	dozen.	Then	they	came	back	at	us.	We	got

into	 a	 crooked	 bit	 of	 traverse	 that	 was	 in	 relatively	 good	 shape	 and	 threw	 up	 a barricade	of	sandbags.	There	was	any	amount	of	them	lying	about.

The	Germans	gave	us	a	bomb	or	two	and	considerable	rifle	fire,	and	we	beat

it	around	the	corner	of	the	bay.	Then	we	had	it	back	and	forth,	a	regular	seesaw game.	We	would	chase	them	back	from	the	barricade,	and	then	they	would	rush

us	and	back	we	would	go.	After	we	had	lost	three	men	and	Lieutenant	May	had

got	a	slight	wound,	we	got	desperate	and	got	out	of	the	trench	and	rushed	them

for	further	orders.	We	fairly	showered	them	as	we	followed	them	up,	regardless of	danger	to	ourselves.	All	this	scrap	through	they	hadn't	done	anything	with	the machine	guns.	One	was	in	our	end	of	the	trench,	and	we	found	that	the	other	was

out	 of	 commission.	 They	 must	 have	 been	 short	 of	 small-arm	 ammunition	 and bombs,	because	on	that	last	strafing	they	cleared	out	and	stayed.

After	 the	 row	 was	 over	 we	 counted	 noses	 and	 found	 four	 dead	 and	 three slightly	 wounded,	 including	 Lieutenant	 May.	 I	 detailed	 two	 men	 to	 take	 the wounded	 and	 the	 Lieutenant	 back.	 That	 left	 four	 of	 us	 to	 consolidate	 the position.	 The	 Lieutenant	 promised	 to	 return	 with	 relief,	 but	 as	 it	 turned	 out	 he was	worse	than	he	thought,	and	he	didn't	get	back.

I	 turned	 to	 and	 inspected	 the	 position.	 It	 was	 pretty	 hopeless.	 There	 really wasn't	much	to	consolidate.	The	whole	works	was	knocked	about	and	was	only

fit	 for	 a	 temporary	 defence.	 There	 were	 about	 a	 dozen	 German	 dead,	 and	 we searched	them	but	found	nothing	of	value.	So	we	strengthened	our	cross-trench

barricade	and	waited	for	the	relief.	It	never	came.

When	it	began	to	get	light,	the	place	looked	even	more	discouraging.	There

was	little	or	no	cover.	We	knew	that	unless	we	got	some	sort	of	concealment,	the airplanes	would	spot	us,	and	that	we	would	get	a	shell	or	two.	So	we	got	out	the entrenching	tools	and	dug	into	the	side	of	the	best	part	of	the	shallow	traverse.

We	finally	got	a	slight	overhang	scraped	out.	We	didn't	dare	go	very	far	under	for fear	 that	 it	 would	 cave.	 We	 got	 some	 sandbags	 up	 on	 the	 sides	 and	 three	 of	 us crawled	into	the	shelter.	The	other	man	made	a	similar	place	for	himself	a	little distance	off.

The	day	dawned	clear	and	bright	and	gave	promise	of	being	hot.	Along	about

seven	 we	 began	 to	 get	 hungry.	 A	 Tommy	 is	 always	 hungry,	 whether	 he	 is	 in danger	 or	 not.	 When	 we	 took	 account	 of	 stock	 and	 found	 that	 none	 of	 us	 had brought	 along	 "iron	 rations",	 we	 discovered	 that	 we	 were	 all	 nearly	 starved.

Killing	is	hungry	work.

We	 had	 only	 ourselves	 to	 blame.	 We	 had	 been	 told	 repeatedly	 never	 to	 go anywhere	without	"iron	rations",	but	Tommy	is	a	good	deal	of	a	child	and	unless you	 show	 him	 the	 immediate	 reason	 for	 a	 thing	 he	 is	 likely	 to	 disregard instructions.	I	rather	blamed	myself	in	this	case	for	not	seeing	that	the	men	had their	 emergency	 food.	 In	 fact,	 it	 was	 my	 duty	 to	 see	 that	 they	 had.	 But	 I	 had overlooked	it.	And	I	hadn't	brought	any	myself.

The	"iron	ration"	consists	of	a	pound	of	"bully	beef",	a	small	tin	containing

tea	and	sugar	enough	for	two	doses,	some	Oxo	cubes,	and	a	few	biscuits	made	of reinforced	concrete.	They	are	issued	for	just	such	an	emergency	as	we	were	in	as we	lay	in	our	isolated	dug-out.	The	soldier	is	apt	to	get	into	that	sort	of	situation almost	any	time,	and	it	is	folly	ever	to	be	without	the	ration.

Well,	we	didn't	have	ours,	and	we	knew	we	wouldn't	get	any	before	night,	if

we	did	then.	One	thing	we	had	too	much	of.	That	was	rum.	The	night	before	a

bunch	of	us	had	been	out	on	a	ration	party,	and	we	had	come	across	a	Brigade

Dump.	This	is	a	station	where	rations	are	left	for	the	various	companies	to	come and	draw	their	own,	also	ammo	and	other	necessities.	There	was	no	one	about,

and	we	had	gone	through	the	outfit.	We	found	two	cases	of	rum,	four	gallons	in	a case,	and	we	promptly	filled	our	bottles,	more	than	a	pint	each.

Tommy	is	always	very	keen	on	his	rum.	The	brand	used	in	the	army	is	high

proof	 and	 burns	 like	 fire	 going	 down,	 but	 it	 is	 warming.	 The	 regular	 ration	 as served	after	a	cold	sentry	go	is	called	a	"tot."	It	is	enough	to	keep	the	cold	out and	 make	 a	 man	 wish	 he	 had	 another.	 The	 average	 Tommy	 will	 steal	 rum whenever	he	can	without	the	danger	of	getting	caught.

It	happened	that	all	four	of	us	were	in	the	looting	party	and	had	our	bottles

full.	 Also	 it	 happened	 that	 we	 were	 all	 normally	 quite	 temperate	 and	 hadn't touched	our	supply.

So	 we	 all	 took	 a	 nip	 and	 tightened	 up	 our	 belts.	 Then	 we	 took	 another	 and another.	 We	 lay	 on	 our	 backs	 with	 our	 heads	 out	 of	 the	 burrow,	 packed	 in	 like sardines	 and	 looking	 up	 at	 the	 sky.	 Half	 a	 dozen	 airplanes	 came	 out	 and	 flew over.	We	had	had	a	hard	night	and	we	all	dozed	off,	at	least	I	did,	and	I	guess	the others	did	also.

Around	nine	we	all	waked	up,	and	Bones—he	was	the	fellow	in	the	middle

—began	 to	 complain	 of	 thirst.	 Then	 we	 all	 took	 another	 nip	 and	 wished	 it	 was water.	We	discussed	the	matter	of	crawling	down	to	a	muddy	pool	at	the	end	of

the	 traverse	 and	 having	 some	 out	 of	 that,	 but	 passed	 it	 up	 as	 there	 was	 a	 dead man	lying	in	it.	Bones,	who	was	pretty	well	educated—he	once	asked	me	if	I	had

visited	 Emerson's	 home	 and	 was	 astounded	 that	 I	 hadn't—quoted	 from	 Kipling something	to	the	effect	that,

When	you	come	to	slaughter

You'll	do	your	work	on	water,

An'	you'll	lick	the	bloomin'	boots	of	'im	that's	got	it.

Then	Bones	cursed	the	rum	and	took	another	nip.	So	did	the	rest	of	us.

There	 was	 a	 considerable	 bombardment	 going	 on	 all	 the	 forenoon,	 but	 few shells	came	anywhere	near	us.	Some	shrapnel	burst	over	us	a	little	way	off	to	the right,	and	some	of	the	fragments	fell	in	the	trench,	but	on	the	whole	the	morning was	uncomfortable	but	not	dangerous.

Around	 half-past	 ten	 we	 saw	 an	 airplane	 fight	 that	 was	 almost	 worth	 the forenoon's	 discomfort.	 A	 lot	 of	 them	 had	 been	 circling	 around	 ever	 since daybreak.	 When	 the	 fight	 started,	 two	 of	 our	 planes	 were	 nearly	 over	 us.

Suddenly	 we	 saw	 three	 Boche	 planes	 volplaning	 down	 from	 away	 up	 above.

They	grew	bigger	and	bigger	and	opened	with	their	guns	when	they	were	nearly

on	top	of	our	fellows.	No	hits.	Then	all	five	started	circling	for	top	position.	One of	 the	 Boches	 started	 to	 fall	 and	 came	 down	 spinning,	 but	 righted	 himself	 not more	 than	 a	 thousand	 feet	 up.	 Our	 anti	 air-craft	 guns	 opened	 on	 him,	 and	 we could	 see	 the	 shells	 bursting	 with	 little	 cottony	 puffs	 all	 around.	 Some	 of	 the shrapnel	 struck	 near	 us.	 They	 missed	 him,	 and	 up	 he	 went	 again.	 Presently	 all five	 came	 circling	 lower	 and	 lower,	 jockeying	 for	 position	 and	 spitting	 away with	their	guns.	As	they	all	got	to	the	lower	levels,	the	anti	air-craft	guns	stopped firing,	fearing	to	get	our	men.

Suddenly	one	of	the	Huns	burst	into	flames	and	came	toppling	down	behind

his	 lines,	 his	 gas	 tank	 ablaze.	 Almost	 immediately	 one	 of	 ours	 dropped,	 also burning	and	behind	the	Boche	lines.

After	that	it	was	two	to	one,	and	the	fight	lasted	more	than	ten	minutes.	Then

down	went	a	Hun,	not	afire	but	tumbling	end	over	end	behind	our	lines.	I	learned afterwards	 that	 this	 fellow	 was	 unhurt	 and	 was	 taken	 prisoner.	 That	 left	 it	 an even	thing.	We	could	see	half	a	dozen	planes	rushing	to	attack	the	lone	Boche.

He	saw	them	too.	For	he	turned	tail	and	skedaddled	for	home.

Bonesie	 began	 to	 philosophize	 on	 the	 cold-bloodedness	 of	 air	 fighting	 and really	worked	himself	up	into	an	almost	optimistic	frame	of	mind.	He	was	right

in	 the	 midst	 of	 a	 flowery	 oration	 on	 our	 comparative	 safety,	 "nestling	 on	 the bosom	 of	 Mother	 Earth",	 when,	 without	 any	 warning	 whatever,	 there	 came	 a perfect	avalanche	of	shell	all	around	us.

I	 knew	 perfectly	 well	 that	 we	 were	 caught.	 The	 shells,	 as	 near	 as	 we	 could see,	 were	 coming	 from	 our	 side.	 Doubtless	 our	 people	 thought	 that	 the	 trench was	 still	 manned	 by	 Germans,	 and	 they	 were	 shelling	 for	 the	 big	 noon	 attack.

Such	an	attack	was	made,	as	I	learned	afterwards,	but	I	never	saw	it.

At	 eleven	 o'clock	 I	 looked	 at	 my	 watch.	 Somehow	 I	 didn't	 fear	 death, although	I	felt	it	was	near.	Maybe	the	rum	was	working.	I	turned	to	Bonesie	and

said,	"What	about	that	safety	stuff,	old	top?"

"Cheer,	cheer,	Darby,"	said	he.	"We	may	pull	through	yet."

"Don't	think	so,"	I	insisted.	"It's	us	for	pushing	up	the	daisies.	Good	luck	if we	don't	meet	again!"

I	 put	 my	 hand	 in	 and	 patted	 Dinky	 on	 the	 back,	 and	 sent	 up	 another	 little prayer	for	luck.	Then	there	was	a	terrific	shock,	and	everything	went	black.

When	 I	 came	 out	 of	 it,	 I	 had	 the	 sensation	 of	 struggling	 up	 out	 of	 water.	 I thought	for	an	instant	that	I	was	drowning.	And	in	effect	that	was	almost	what

was	 happening	 to	 me.	 I	 was	 buried,	 all	 but	 one	 side	 of	 my	 face.	 A	 tremendous weight	pressed	down	on	me,	and	I	could	only	breathe	in	little	gasps.

I	 tried	 to	 move	 my	 legs	 and	 arms	 and	 couldn't.	 Then	 I	 wiggled	 my	 fingers and	toes	to	see	if	any	bones	were	broken.	They	wiggled	all	right.	My	right	nostril and	eye	were	full	of	dirt;	also	my	mouth.	I	spit	out	the	dirt	and	moved	my	head

until	my	nose	and	eye	were	clear.	I	ached	all	over.

It	was	along	toward	sundown.	Up	aloft	a	single	airplane	was	winging	toward

our	 lines.	 I	 remember	 that	 I	 wondered	 vaguely	 if	 he	 was	 the	 same	 fellow	 who had	been	fighting	just	before	the	world	fell	in	on	me.

I	tried	to	sing	out	to	the	rest	of	the	men,	but	the	best	I	could	do	was	a	kind	of loud	 gurgle.	 There	 was	 no	 answer.	 My	 head	 was	 humming,	 and	 the	 blood seemed	to	be	bursting	my	ears.	I	was	terribly	sorry	for	myself	and	tried	to	pull my	strength	together	for	a	big	try	at	throwing	the	weight	off	my	chest,	but	I	was absolutely	helpless.	Then	again	I	slid	out	of	consciousness.

It	 was	 dark	 when	 I	 struggled	 up	 through	 the	 imaginary	 water	 again.	 I	 was still	breathing	in	gasps,	and	I	could	feel	my	heart	going	in	great	thumps	that	hurt and	 seemed	 to	 shake	 the	 ground.	 My	 tongue	 was	 curled	 up	 and	 dry,	 and	 fever was	simply	burning	me	up.	My	mind	was	clear,	and	I	wished	that	I	hadn't	drunk

that	rum.	Finding	I	could	raise	my	head	a	little,	I	cocked	it	up,	squinting	over	my cheek	 bones—I	 was	 on	 my	 back—and	 could	 catch	 the	 far-off	 flicker	 of	 the silver-green	flare	lights.	There	was	a	rattle	of	musketry	off	in	the	direction	where the	Boche	lines	ought	to	be.	From	behind	came	the	constant	boom	of	big	guns.	I

lay	back	and	watched	the	stars,	which	were	bright	and	uncommonly	low.	Then	a

shell	 burst	 near	 by,—not	 near	 enough	 to	 hurt,—but	 buried	 as	 I	 was	 the	 whole earth	seemed	to	shake.	My	heart	stopped	beating,	and	I	went	out	again.

When	I	came	to	the	next	time,	it	was	still	dark,	and	somebody	was	lifting	me

on	 to	 a	 stretcher.	 My	 first	 impression	 was	 of	 getting	 a	 long	 breath.	 I	 gulped	 it down,	and	with	every	grateful	inhalation	I	felt	my	ribs	painfully	snapping	back

into	place.	Oh,	Lady!	Didn't	I	just	eat	that	air	up.

And	 then,	 having	 gotten	 filled	 up	 with	 the	 long-denied	 oxygen,	 I	 asked,

"Where's	the	others?"

"Ayen't	no	hothers,"	was	the	brief	reply.

And	 there	 weren't.	 Later	 I	 reconstructed	 the	 occurrences	 of	 the	 night	 from what	I	was	told	by	the	rescuing	party.

A	 big	 shell	 had	 slammed	 down	 on	 us,	 drilling	 Bonesie,	 the	 man	 in	 the middle,	from	end	to	end.	He	was	demolished.	The	shell	was	a	"dud",	that	is,	it didn't	explode.	If	it	had,	there	wouldn't	have	been	anything	whatever	left	of	any of	us.	As	it	was	our	overhang	caved	in,	letting	sandbags	and	earth	down	on	the

remaining	man	and	myself.	The	other	man	was	buried	clean	under.	He	had	life	in

him	still	when	he	was	dug	out	but	"went	west"	in	about	ten	minutes.

The	 fourth	 man	 was	 found	 dead	 from	 shrapnel.	 I	 found,	 too,	 that	 the	 two unwounded	men	who	had	gone	back	with	Lieutenant	May	had	both	been	killed

on	the	way	in.	So	out	of	the	twelve	men	who	started	on	the	"suicide	club"	stunt	I was	the	only	one	left.	Dinky	was	still	inside	my	tunic,	and	I	laid	the	luck	all	to him.

Back	in	hospital	I	was	found	to	be	suffering	from	shell	shock.	Also	my	heart

was	 pushed	 out	 of	 place.	 There	 were	 no	 bones	 broken,	 though	 I	 was	 sore	 all over,	 and	 several	 ribs	 were	 pulled	 around	 so	 that	 it	 was	 like	 a	 knife	 thrust	 at every	 breath.	 Besides	 that,	 my	 nerves	 were	 shattered.	 I	 jumped	 a	 foot	 at	 the slightest	noise	and	twitched	a	good	deal.

At	the	end	of	a	week	I	asked	the	M.O.	if	I	would	get	Blighty	and	he	said	he

didn't	 think	 so,	 not	 directly.	 He	 rather	 thought	 that	 they	 would	 keep	 me	 in hospital	for	a	month	or	two	and	see	how	I	came	out.	The	officer	was	a	Canadian

and	had	a	sense	of	humor	and	was	most	affable.	I	told	him	if	this	jamming	wasn't going	 to	 get	 me	 Blighty,	 I	 wanted	 to	 go	 back	 to	 duty	 and	 get	 a	 real	 one.	 He laughed	and	tagged	me	for	a	beach	resort	at	Ault-Onival	on	the	northern	coast	of

France.

I	was	there	a	week	and	had	a	bully	time.	The	place	had	been	a	fashionable

watering	place	before	the	war,	and	when	I	was	there	the	transient	population	was largely	wealthy	Belgians.	They	entertained	a	good	deal	and	did	all	they	could	for the	pleasure	of	the	four	thousand	boys	who	were	at	the	camp.	The	Y.M.C.A.	had

a	 huge	 tent	 and	 spread	 themselves	 in	 taking	 care	 of	 the	 soldiers.	 There	 were entertainments	 almost	 every	 night,	 moving	 pictures,	 and	 music.	 The	 food	 was awfully	good	and	the	beds	comfortable,	and	that	pretty	nearly	spells	heaven	to	a man	down	from	the	front.

Best	 of	 all,	 the	 bathing	 was	 fine,	 and	 it	 was	 possible	 to	 keep	 the	 cooties under	control,—more	or	less.	I	went	in	bathing	two	and	three	times	daily	as	the

sloping	shore	made	it	just	as	good	at	low	tide	as	at	high.

I	think	that	glorious	week	at	the	beach	made	the	hardships	of	the	front	just

left	 behind	 almost	 worth	 while.	 My	 chum,	 Corporal	 Wells,	 who	 had	 a	 quaint Cockney	philosophy,	used	to	say	that	he	liked	to	have	the	stomach	ache	because

it	felt	so	good	when	it	stopped.	On	the	same	theory	I	became	nearly	convinced

that	a	month	in	the	trenches	was	good	fun	because	it	felt	so	good	to	get	out.

At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 week	 I	 was	 better	 but	 still	 shaky.	 I	 started	 pestering	 the M.O.	 to	 tag	 me	 for	 Blighty.	 He	 wouldn't,	 so	 I	 sprung	 the	 same	 proposition	 on him	that	I	had	on	the	doctor	at	the	base,—to	send	me	back	to	duty	if	he	couldn't send	 me	 to	 England.	 The	 brute	 took	 me	 at	 my	 word	 and	 sent	 me	 back	 to	 the battalion.

I	rejoined	on	the	Somme	again	just	as	they	were	going	back	for	the	second

time	in	that	most	awful	part	of	the	line.	Many	of	the	old	faces	were	gone.	Some

had	got	the	wooden	cross,	and	some	had	gone	to	Blighty.

I	sure	was	glad	when	old	Wellsie	hopped	out	and	grabbed	me.

"Gawd	lumme,	Darby,"	he	said.	"Hi	sye,	an'	me	thinkin'	as	'ow	you	was	back in	 Blighty.	 An'	 'ere	 ye	 are	 yer	 blinkin'	 old	 self.	 Or	 is	 it	 yer	 bloomin'	 ghost.	 I awsks	ye.	Strike	me	pink,	Yank.	I'm	glad."

And	 he	 was.	 At	 that	 I	 did	 feel	 more	 or	 less	 ghostly.	 I	 seemed	 to	 have	 lost some	of	my	confidence.	I	expected	to	"go	west"	on	the	next	time	in.	And	that's	a bad	way	to	feel	out	there.





CHAPTER	XIII

BACK	ON	THE	SOMME	AGAIN

When	 I	 rejoined	 the	 battalion	 they	 were	 just	 going	 into	 the	 Somme	 again after	a	two	weeks'	rest.	They	didn't	like	it	a	bit.

"Gawd	lumme,"	says	Wellsie,	"'ave	we	got	to	fight	th'	'ole	blinkin'	war.	Is	it right?	I	awsks	yer.	Is	it?"

It	was	all	wrong.	We	had	been	told	after	High	Wood	that	we	would	not	have

to	go	into	action	again	in	that	part	of	the	line	but	that	we	would	have	a	month	of rest	and	after	that	would	be	sent	up	to	the	Ypres	sector.	"Wipers"	hadn't	been	any garden	 of	 roses	 early	 in	 the	 war,	 but	 it	 was	 paradise	 now	 compared	 with	 the Somme.

It	 was	 a	 sad	 lot	 of	 men	 when	 we	 swung	 out	 on	 the	 road	 again	 back	 to	 the Somme,	 and	 there	 was	 less	 singing	 than	 usual.	 That	 first	 night	 we	 remained	 at Mametz	Wood.	We	figured	that	we	would	get	to	kip	while	the	kipping	was	good.

There	were	some	old	Boche	dug-outs	in	fair	condition,	and	we	were	in	a	fair	way

to	get	comfortable.	No	luck!

We	were	hardly	down	to	a	good	sleep	when	C	company	was	called	to	fall	in

without	 equipment,	 and	 we	 knew	 that	 meant	 fatigue	 of	 some	 sort.	 I	 have	 often admired	the	unknown	who	invented	that	word	"fatigue"	as	applied	in	a	military term.	 He	 used	 it	 as	 a	 disguise	 for	 just	 plain	 hard	 work.	 It	 means	 anything whatever	in	the	way	of	duty	that	does	not	have	to	do	directly	with	the	manning

of	the	trenches.

This	time	we	clicked	a	burial	fatigue.	It	was	my	first.	I	never	want	another.	I

took	 a	 party	 of	 ten	 men	 and	 we	 set	 out,	 armed	 with	 picks	 and	 shovels,	 and,	 of course,	rifles	and	bandoliers	(cloth	pockets	containing	fifty	rounds	of	ammo).

We	hiked	three	miles	up	to	High	Wood	and	in	the	early	morning	began	the

job	 of	 getting	 some	 of	 the	 dead	 under	 ground.	 We	 were	 almost	 exactly	 in	 the same	place	from	which	we	had	gone	over	after	the	tanks.	I	kept	expecting	all	the time	to	run	across	the	bodies	of	some	of	our	own	men.	It	was	a	most	unpleasant

feeling.

Some	cleaning	up	had	already	been	done,	so	the	place	was	not	so	bad	as	it had	been,	but	it	was	bad	enough.	The	advance	had	gone	forward	so	far	that	we

were	practically	out	of	shell	range,	and	we	were	safe	working.

The	burial	method	was	to	dig	a	pit	four	feet	deep	and	big	enough	to	hold	six

men.	Then	we	packed	them	in.	The	worst	part	of	it	was	that	most	of	the	bodies

were	pretty	far	gone	and	in	the	falling	away	stage.	It	was	hard	to	move	them.	I

had	 to	 put	 on	 my	 gas	 mask	 to	 endure	 the	 stench	 and	 so	 did	 some	 of	 the	 other men.	Some	who	had	done	this	work	before	rather	seemed	to	like	it.

I	would	search	a	body	for	identification	marks	and	jot	down	the	data	found

on	 a	 piece	 of	 paper.	 When	 the	 man	 was	 buried	 under,	 I	 would	 stick	 a	 rifle	 up over	 him	 and	 tuck	 the	 record	 into	 the	 trap	 in	 the	 butt	 of	 the	 gun	 where	 the	 oil bottle	is	carried.

When	 the	 pioneers	 came	 up,	 they	 would	 remove	 the	 rifle	 and	 substitute	 a little	wooden	cross	with	the	name	painted	on	it.	The	indifference	with	which	the men	 soon	 came	 to	 regard	 this	 burial	 fatigue	 was	 amazing.	 I	 remember	 one incident	of	that	first	morning,	a	thing	that	didn't	seem	at	all	shocking	at	the	time, but	which,	looking	back	upon	it,	illustrates	the	matter-of-factness	of	the	soldier's viewpoint	on	death.

"Hi	sye,	Darby,"	sang	out	one	fellow.	"Hi	got	a	blighter	'ere	wif	only	one	leg.

Wot'll	Hi	do	wif	'im?"

"Put	him	under	with	only	one,	you	blinking	idiot,"	said	I.

Presently	he	called	out	again,	this	time	with	a	little	note	of	satisfaction	and

triumph	in	his	voice.

"Darby,	Hi	sye.	I	got	a	leg	for	that	bleeder.	Fits	'im	perfect."

Well,	I	went	over	and	took	a	look	and	to	my	horror	found	that	the	fool	had

stuck	a	German	leg	on	the	body,	high	boot	and	all.	I	wouldn't	stand	for	that	and had	it	out	again.	I	wasn't	going	to	send	a	poor	fellow	on	his	last	pilgrimage	with any	 Boche	 leg,	 and	 said	 so.	 Later	 I	 heard	 this	 undertaking	 genius	 of	 a	 Tommy grousing	and	muttering	to	himself.

"Cawn't	 please	 Darby,"	 says	 he,	 "no	 matter	 wot.	 Fawncy	 the	 blighter'd	 feel better	wif	two	legs,	if	one	was	Boche.	It's	a	fair	crime	sendin'	'im	hover	the	river wif	only	one."

I	 was	 sure	 thankful	 when	 that	 burial	 fatigue	 was	 over,	 and	 early	 in	 the forenoon	we	started	back	to	rest.

Rest,	did	I	say?	Not	that	trip.	We	were	hardly	back	to	Mametz	and	down	to

breakfast	when	along	came	an	order	to	fall	in	for	a	carrying	party.	All	that	day we	carried	boxes	of	Millses	up	to	the	dump	that	was	by	High	Wood,	three	long

miles	over	hard	going.	Being	a	corporal	had	its	compensations	at	this	game,	as	I had	no	carrying	to	do;	but	inasmuch	as	the	bombs	were	moved	two	boxes	to	a

man,	 I	 got	 my	 share	 of	 the	 hard	 work	 helping	 men	 out	 of	 holes	 and	 lending	 a hand	when	they	were	mired.

Millses	 are	 packed	 with	 the	 bombs	 and	 detonators	 separate	 in	 the	 box,	 and the	men	are	very	careful	in	the	handling	of	them.	So	the	moving	of	material	of

this	kind	is	wearing.

Another	 line	 of	 man-killers	 that	 we	 had	 to	 move	 were	 "toffy	 apples."	 This quaint	 toy	 is	 a	 huge	 bomb,	 perfectly	 round	 and	 weighing	 sixty	 pounds,	 with	 a long	 rod	 or	 pipe	 which	 inserts	 into	 the	 mortar.	 Toffy	 apples	 are	 about	 the awkwardest	thing	imaginable	to	carry.

This	carrying	stunt	went	on	for	eight	long	days	and	nights.	We	worked	on	an

average	sixteen	hours	a	day.	It	rained	nearly	all	the	time,	and	we	never	got	dried out.	 The	 food	 was	 awful,	 as	 the	 advance	 had	 been	 so	 fast	 that	 it	 was	 almost impossible	to	get	up	the	supplies,	and	the	men	in	the	front	trenches	had	the	first pick	of	the	grub.	It	was	also	up	to	us	to	get	the	water	up	to	the	front.	The	method on	 this	 was	 to	 use	 the	 five-gallon	 gasoline	 cans.	 Sometimes	 they	 were	 washed out,	oftener	they	weren't.	Always	the	water	tasted	of	gas.	We	got	the	same	thing, and	several	times	I	became	sick	drinking	the	stuff.

When	that	eight	days	of	carrying	was	over,	we	were	so	fed	up	that	we	didn't

care	whether	we	clicked	or	not.	Maybe	it	was	good	mental	preparation	for	what

was	to	come,	for	on	top	of	it	all	it	turned	out	that	we	were	to	go	over	the	top	in another	big	attack.

When	we	got	that	news,	I	got	Dinky	out	and	scolded	him.	Maybe	I'd	better

tell	 you	 all	 about	 Dinky	 before	 I	 go	 any	 farther.	 Soldiers	 are	 rather	 prone	 to superstitions.	Relieved	of	all	responsibility	and	with	most	of	their	thinking	done for	 them,	 they	 revert	 surprisingly	 quick	 to	 a	 state	 of	 more	 or	 less	 savage mentality.	Perhaps	it	would	be	better	to	call	the	state	childlike.	At	any	rate	they accumulate	a	lot	of	fool	superstitions	and	hang	to	them.	The	height	of	folly	and the	superlative	invitation	to	bad	luck	is	lighting	three	fags	on	one	match.	When

that	happens	one	of	the	three	is	sure	to	click	it	soon.

As	one	out	of	any	group	of	three	anywhere	stands	a	fair	chance	of	"getting

his",	 fag	 or	 no	 fag,	 the	 thing	 is	 reasonably	 sure	 to	 work	 out	 according	 to	 the popular	belief.	Most	every	man	has	his	unlucky	day	in	the	trenches.	One	of	mine

was	Monday.	The	others	were	Tuesday,	Wednesday,	Thursday,	Friday,	Saturday,

and	Sunday.

Practically	every	soldier	carries	some	kind	of	mascot	or	charm.	A	good	many

are	 crucifixes	 and	 religious	 tokens.	 Some	 are	 coins.	 Corporal	 Wells	 had	 a	 sea shell	 with	 three	 little	 black	 spots	 on	 it.	 He	 considered	 three	 his	 lucky	 number.

Thirteen	 was	 mine.	 My	 mascot	 was	 the	 aforesaid	 and	 much	 revered	 Dinky.

Dinky	was	and	is	a	small	black	cat	made	of	velvet.	He's	entirely	flat	except	his head,	which	is	becomingly	round	with	yellow	glass	eyes.	I	carried	Dinky	inside

my	tunic	always	and	felt	safer	with	him	there.	He	hangs	at	the	head	of	my	bed

now	and	I	feel	better	with	him	there.	I	realize	perfectly	that	all	this	sounds	like tommyrot,	 and	 that	 superstition	 may	 be	 a	 relic	 of	 barbarism	 and	 ignorance.

Never	mind!	Wellsie	sized	the	situation	up	one	day	when	we	were	talking	about

this	very	thing.

"Maybe	my	shell	ayen't	doin'	me	no	good,"	says	Wells.	"Maybe	Dinky	ayen't doin'	you	no	good.	But	'e	ayen't	doin'	ye	no	'arm.	So	'ang	on	to	'im."

I	 figure	 that	 if	 there's	 anything	 in	 war	 that	 "ayen't	 doin'	 ye	 no	 'arm",	 it	 is pretty	good	policy	to	"'ang	on	to	it."

It	 was	 Sunday	 the	 eighth	 day	 of	 October	 that	 the	 order	 came	 to	 move	 into what	 was	 called	 the	 "O.G.I.",	 that	 is,	 the	 old	 German	 first	 line.	 You	 will understand	that	this	was	the	line	the	Boches	had	occupied	a	few	days	before	and

out	 of	 which	 they	 had	 been	 driven	 in	 the	 Big	 Push.	 In	 front	 of	 this	 trench	 was Eaucort	Abbaye,	which	had	been	razed	with	the	aid	of	the	tanks.

We	 had	 watched	 this	 battle	 from	 the	 rear	 from	 the	 slight	 elevation	 of	 High Wood,	 and	 it	 had	 been	 a	 wonderful	 sight	 to	 see	 other	 men	 go	 out	 over	 the	 top without	having	ourselves	to	think	about.	They	had	poured	out,	wave	after	wave,

a	 large	 part	 of	 them	 Scotch	 with	 their	 kilted	 rumps	 swinging	 in	 perfect	 time,	 a smashing	barrage	going	on	ahead,	and	the	tanks	lumbering	along	with	a	kind	of

clumsy	 majesty.	 When	 they	 hit	 the	 objective,	 the	 tanks	 crawled	 in	 and	 made short	work	of	it.

The	infantry	had	hard	work	of	it	after	the	positions	were	taken,	as	there	were

numerous	underground	caverns	and	passages	which	had	to	be	mopped	out.	This was	 done	 by	 dropping	 smoke	 bombs	 in	 the	 entrances	 and	 smoking	 the	 Boches out	like	bees.

When	 we	 came	 up,	 we	 inherited	 these	 underground	 shelters,	 and	 they	 were mighty	comfortable	after	the	kipping	in	the	muck.	There	were	a	lot	of	souvenirs

to	be	picked	up,	and	almost	everybody	annexed	helmets	and	other	truck	that	had

been	left	behind	by	the	Germans.

Sometimes	it	was	dangerous	to	go	after	souvenirs	too	greedily.	The	inventive

Hun	had	a	habit	of	fixing	up	a	body	with	a	bomb	under	it	and	a	tempting	wrist

watch	on	the	hand.	If	you	started	to	take	the	watch,	the	bomb	went	off,	and	after that	you	didn't	care	what	time	it	was.

I	 accumulated	 a	 number	 of	 very	 fine	 razors,	 and	 one	 of	 the	 saw-tooth bayonets	the	Boche	pioneers	use.	This	is	a	perfectly	hellish	weapon	that	slips	in easily	 and	 mangles	 terribly	 when	 it	 is	 withdrawn.	 I	 had	 thought	 that	 I	 would have	a	nice	collection	of	souvenirs	to	take	to	Blighty	if	I	ever	got	leave.	I	got	the leave	all	right,	and	shortly,	but	the	collection	stayed	behind.

The	dug-out	that	Number	10	drew	was	built	of	concrete	and	was	big	enough

to	 accommodate	 the	 entire	 platoon.	 We	 were	 well	 within	 the	 Boche	 range	 and early	in	the	day	had	several	casualties,	one	of	them	a	chap	named	Stransfield,	a young	 Yorkshireman	 who	 was	 a	 very	 good	 friend	 of	 mine.	 Stransie	 was	 sitting on	the	top	step	cleaning	his	rifle	and	was	blown	to	pieces	by	a	falling	shell.	After that	 we	 kept	 to	 cover	 all	 day	 and	 slept	 all	 the	 time.	 We	 needed	 it	 after	 the exhausting	work	of	the	past	eight	days.

It	 was	 along	 about	 dark	 when	 I	 was	 awakened	 by	 a	 runner	 from

headquarters,	which	was	in	a	dug-out	a	little	way	up	the	line,	with	word	that	the platoon	commanders	were	wanted.	I	happened	to	be	in	command	of	the	platoon,

as	 Mr.	 Blofeld	 was	 acting	 second	 in	 command	 of	 the	 company,	 Sergeant	 Page was	away	in	Havre	as	instructor	for	a	month,	and	I	was	next	senior.

I	thought	that	probably	this	was	merely	another	detail	for	some	fatigue,	so	I

asked	Wells	if	he	would	go.	He	did	and	in	about	half	an	hour	came	back	with	a

face	 as	 long	 as	 my	 arm.	 I	 was	 sitting	 on	 the	 fire	 step	 cleaning	 my	 rifle	 and Wellsie	sank	dejectedly	down	beside	me.

"Darby,"	he	sighed	hopelessly,	"wot	th'	blinkin'	'ell	do	you	think	is	up	now?"

I	hadn't	the	faintest	idea	and	said	so.	I	had,	however,	as	the	educated	Bones used	 to	 say	 "a	 premonition	 of	 impending	 disaster."	 As	 a	 premonitor	 I	 was	 a success.	Disaster	was	right.

Wellsie	sighed	again	and	spilled	the	news.

"We're	 goin'	 over	 th'	 bleedin'	 top	 at	 nine.	 We	 don't	 'ave	 to	 carry	 no	 tools.

We're	in	the	first	bloomin'	wave."

Going	without	tools	was	supposed	to	be	a	sort	of	consolation	for	being	in	the

first	wave.	The	other	three	waves	carry	either	picks	or	shovels.	They	consolidate the	trenches	after	they	have	been	taken	by	the	first	wave.	That	is,	they	turn	the trench	 around,	 facing	 the	 other	 way,	 to	 be	 ready	 for	 a	 counter	 attack.	 It	 is	 a miserable	 job.	 The	 tools	 are	 heavy	 and	 awkward,	 and	 the	 last	 waves	 get	 the cream	 of	 the	 artillery	 fire,	 as	 the	 Boche	 naturally	 does	 not	 want	 to	 take	 the chance	of	shelling	the	first	wave	for	fear	of	getting	his	own	men.	However,	the

first	wave	gets	the	machine-gun	fire	and	gets	it	good.	At	that	the	first	wave	is	the preference.	 I	 have	 heard	 hundreds	 of	 men	 say	 so.	 Probably	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 a bullet,	 unless	 it	 is	 explosive,	 makes	 a	 relatively	 clean	 wound,	 while	 a	 shell fragment	may	mangle	fearfully.

Wells	 and	 I	 were	 talking	 over	 the	 infernal	 injustice	 of	 the	 situation	 when another	 runner	 arrived	 from	 the	 Sergeant	 Major's,	 ordering	 us	 up	 for	 the	 rum issue.	I	went	up	for	the	rum	and	left	Wells	to	break	the	news	about	going	over.

I	got	an	extra	large	supply,	as	the	Sergeant	Major	was	good	humored.	It	was

the	 last	 rum	 he	 ever	 served.	 I	 got	 enough	 for	 the	 full	 platoon	 and	 then	 some, which	was	a	lot,	as	the	platoon	was	well	down	in	numbers	owing	to	casualties.	I

went	among	the	boys	with	a	spoon	and	the	rum	in	a	mess	tin	and	served	out	two

tots	instead	of	the	customary	one.	After	that	all	hands	felt	a	little	better,	but	not much.	They	were	all	fagged	out	after	the	week's	hard	work.	I	don't	think	I	ever

saw	a	more	discouraged	lot	getting	ready	to	go	over.	For	myself	I	didn't	seem	to care	much,	I	was	in	such	rotten	condition	physically.	I	rather	hoped	it	would	be my	last	time.





CHAPTER	XIV

THE	LAST	TIME	OVER	THE	TOP

A	general	cleaning	of	rifles	started,	although	it	was	dark.	Mine	was	already

in	good	shape,	and	I	leaned	it	against	the	side	of	the	trench	and	went	below	for the	rest	of	my	equipment.	While	I	was	gone,	a	shell	fragment	undid	all	my	work

by	smashing	the	breech.

I	had	seen	a	new	short	German	rifle	in	the	dug-out	with	a	bayonet	and	ammo,

and	decided	to	use	that.	I	hid	all	my	souvenirs,	planning	to	get	them	when	I	came out	 if	 I	 ever	 came	 out.	 I	 hadn't	 much	 nerve	 left	 after	 the	 bashing	 I	 had	 taken	 a fortnight	before	and	didn't	hold	much	hope.

Our	 instructions	 were	 of	 the	 briefest.	 It	 was	 the	 old	 story	 that	 there	 would probably	be	little	resistance,	if	any.	There	would	be	a	few	machine	guns	to	stop us,	 but	 nothing	 more.	 The	 situation	 we	 had	 to	 handle	 was	 this:	 A	 certain	 small sector	 had	 held	 on	 the	 attacks	 of	 the	 few	 previous	 days,	 and	 the	 line	 had	 bent back	around	it.	All	we	had	to	do	was	to	straighten	the	line.	We	had	heard	this	old ghost	story	too	often	to	believe	a	word	of	it.

Our	 place	 had	 been	 designated	 where	 we	 were	 to	 get	 into	 extended

formation,	 and	 our	 general	 direction	 was	 clear.	 We	 filed	 out	 of	 the	 trench	 at eight-thirty,	 and	 as	 we	 passed	 the	 other	 platoons,—we	 had	 been	 to	 the	 rear,—

they	tossed	us	the	familiar	farewell	hail,	"The	best	o'	luck,	mytie."

We	soon	found	ourselves	in	the	old	sunken	road	that	ran	in	front	of	Eaucort

Abbaye.	 At	 this	 point	 we	 were	 not	 under	 observation,	 as	 a	 rise	 in	 the	 ground would	 have	 protected	 us	 even	 though	 it	 had	 been	 daylight.	 The	 moon	 was shining	brilliantly,	and	we	knew	that	it	would	not	be	anything	in	the	nature	of	a surprise	 attack.	 We	 got	 into	 extended	 formation	 and	 waited	 for	 the	 order	 to advance.	I	thought	I	should	go	crazy	during	that	short	wait.	Shells	had	begun	to burst	over	and	around	us,	and	I	was	sure	the	next	would	be	mine.

Presently	one	burst	a	little	behind	me,	and	down	went	Captain	Green	and	the

Sergeant	Major	with	whom	he	had	been	talking.	Captain	Green	died	a	few	days

later	at	Rouen,	and	the	Sergeant	Major	lost	an	arm.	This	was	a	hard	blow	right	at the	start,	and	it	spelled	disaster.	Everything	started	to	go	wrong.	Mr.	Blofeld	was

in	 command,	 and	 another	 officer	 thought	 that	 he	 was	 in	 charge.	 We	 got conflicting	orders,	and	there	was	one	grand	mix-up.	Eventually	we	advanced	and

went	straight	up	over	the	ridge.	We	walked	slap-bang	into	perfectly	directed	fire.

Torrents	 of	 machine-gun	 bullets	 crackled	 about	 us,	 and	 we	 went	 forward	 with our	heads	down,	like	men	facing	into	a	storm.	It	was	a	living	marvel	that	any	one could	come	through	it.

A	lot	of	them	didn't.	Mr.	Blofeld,	who	was	near	me,	leaped	in	the	air,	letting

go	 a	 hideous	 yell.	 I	 ran	 to	 him,	 disregarding	 the	 instruction	 not	 to	 stop	 to	 help any	one.	He	was	struck	in	the	abdomen	with	an	explosive	bullet	and	was	done

for.	I	felt	terribly	about	Mr.	Blofeld,	as	he	had	been	a	good	friend	to	me.	He	was the	 finest	 type	 of	 officer	 of	 the	 new	 English	 army,	 the	 rare	 sort	 who	 can	 be democratic	and	yet	command	respect.	He	had	talked	with	me	often,	and	I	knew

of	 his	 family	 and	 home	 life.	 He	 was	 more	 like	 an	 elder	 brother	 to	 me	 than	 a superior	officer.	I	left	Mr.	Blofeld	and	went	on.

The	 hail	 of	 bullets	 grew	 even	 worse.	 They	 whistled	 and	 cracked	 and

squealed,	 and	 I	 began	 to	 wonder	 why	 on	 earth	 I	 didn't	 get	 mine.	 Men	 were falling	on	all	sides	and	the	shrieks	of	those	hit	were	the	worst	I	had	heard.	The darkness	made	it	worse,	and	although	I	had	been	over	the	top	before	by	daylight

this	was	the	last	limit	of	hellishness.	And	nothing	but	plain,	unmixed	machine-

gun	fire.	As	yet	there	was	no	artillery	action	to	amount	to	anything.

Once	 again	 I	 put	 my	 hand	 inside	 my	 tunic	 and	 stroked	 Dinky	 and	 said	 to him,	 "For	 God's	 sake,	 Dink,	 see	 me	 through	 this	 time."	 I	 meant	 it	 too.	 I	 was actually	 praying,—to	 my	 mascot.	 I	 realize	 that	 this	 was	 plain,	 unadulterated, heathenish	 fetish	 worship,	 but	 it	 shows	 what	 a	 man	 reverts	 to	 in	 the	 barbaric stress	of	war.

By	 this	 time	 we	 were	 within	 about	 thirty	 yards	 of	 the	 Boche	 parapet	 and could	see	them	standing	shoulder	to	shoulder	on	the	fire	step,	swarms	of	them,

packed	 in,	 with	 the	 bayonets	 gleaming.	 Machine	 guns	 were	 emplaced	 and

vomiting	death	at	incredibly	short	intervals	along	the	parapet.	Flares	were	going up	continuously,	and	it	was	almost	as	light	as	day.

We	were	terribly	outnumbered,	and	the	casualties	had	already	been	so	great

that	I	saw	we	were	in	for	the	worst	thing	we	had	ever	known.	Moreover,	the	next

waves	hadn't	appeared	behind	us.

I	was	in	command,	as	all	the	officers	and	non-coms	so	far	as	I	could	make

out	had	snuffed.	I	signalled	to	halt	and	take	cover,	my	idea	being	to	wait	for	the

other	waves	to	catch	up.	The	men	needed	no	second	invitation	to	lie	low.	They rolled	into	the	shell	holes	and	burrowed	where	there	was	no	cover.

I	drew	a	pretty	decent	hole	myself,	and	a	man	came	pitching	in	on	top	of	me,

screaming	horribly.	It	was	Corporal	Hoskins,	a	close	friend	of	mine.	He	had	it	in the	stomach	and	clicked	in	a	minute	or	two.

During	 the	 few	 minutes	 that	 I	 lay	 in	 that	 hole,	 I	 suffered	 the	 worst	 mental anguish	I	ever	knew.	Seeing	so	many	of	my	closest	chums	go	west	so	horribly

had	 nearly	 broken	 me,	 shaky	 as	 I	 was	 when	 the	 attack	 started.	 I	 was	 dripping with	sweat	and	frightfully	nauseated.	A	sudden	overpowering	impulse	seized	me

to	get	out	in	the	open	and	have	it	over	with.	I	was	ready	to	die.

Sooner	than	I	ought,	for	the	second	wave	had	not	yet	shown	up,	I	shrilled	the

whistle	 and	 lifted	 them	 out.	 It	 was	 a	 hopeless	 charge,	 but	 I	 was	 done.	 I	 would have	gone	at	them	alone.	Anything	to	close	the	act.	To	blazes	with	everything!

As	 I	 scrambled	 out	 of	 the	 shell	 hole,	 there	 was	 a	 blinding,	 ear-splitting explosion	 slightly	 to	 my	 left,	 and	 I	 went	 down.	 I	 did	 not	 lose	 consciousness entirely.	A	red-hot	iron	was	through	my	right	arm,	and	some	one	had	hit	me	on

the	left	shoulder	with	a	sledge	hammer.	I	felt	crushed,—shattered.

My	 impressions	 of	 the	 rest	 of	 that	 night	 are,	 for	 the	 most	 part,	 vague	 and indistinct;	 but	 in	 spots	 they	 stand	 out	 clear	 and	 vivid.	 The	 first	 thing	 I	 knew definitely	was	when	Smith	bent	over	me,	cutting	the	sleeve	out	of	my	tunic.

"It's	a	Blighty	one,"	says	Smithy.	That	was	some	consolation.	I	was	back	in the	 shell	 hole,	 or	 in	 another,	 and	 there	 were	 five	 or	 six	 other	 fellows	 piled	 in there	 too.	 All	 of	 them	 were	 dead	 except	 Smith	 and	 a	 man	 named	 Collins,	 who had	 his	 arm	 clean	 off,	 and	 myself.	 Smith	 dressed	 my	 wound	 and	 Collins',	 and said:

"We'd	 better	 get	 out	 of	 here	 before	 Fritz	 rushes	 us.	 The	 attack	 was	 a	 ruddy failure,	and	they'll	come	over	and	bomb	us	out	of	here."

Smith	and	I	got	out	of	the	hole	and	started	to	crawl.	It	appeared	that	he	had	a

bullet	 through	 the	 thigh,	 though	 he	 hadn't	 said	 anything	 about	 it	 before.	 We crawled	a	little	way,	and	then	the	bullets	were	flying	so	thick	that	I	got	an	insane desire	 to	 run	 and	 get	 away	 from	 them.	 I	 got	 to	 my	 feet	 and	 legged	 it.	 So	 did Smith,	though	how	he	did	it	with	a	wounded	thigh	I	don't	know.

The	 next	 thing	 I	 remember	 I	 was	 on	 a	 stretcher.	 The	 beastly	 thing	 swayed

and	pitched,	and	I	got	seasick.	Then	came	another	crash	directly	over	head,	and out	 I	 went	 again.	 When	 I	 came	 to,	 my	 head	 was	 as	 clear	 as	 a	 bell.	 A	 shell	 had burst	 over	 us	 and	 had	 killed	 one	 stretcher	 bearer.	 The	 other	 had	 disappeared.

Smith	was	there.	He	and	I	got	to	our	feet	and	put	our	arms	around	each	other	and staggered	 on.	 The	 next	 I	 knew	 I	 was	 in	 the	 Cough	 Drop	 dressing	 station,	 so called	from	the	peculiar	formation	of	the	place.	We	had	tea	and	rum	here	and	a

couple	of	fags	from	a	sergeant	major	of	the	R.A.M.C.

After	that	there	was	a	ride	on	a	flat	car	on	a	light	railway	and	another	in	an

ambulance	 with	 an	 American	 driver.	 Snatches	 of	 conversation	 about	 Broadway and	 a	 girl	 in	 Newark	 floated	 back,	 and	 I	 tried	 to	 work	 up	 ambition	 enough	 to sing	out	and	ask	where	the	chap	came	from.	So	far	I	hadn't	had	much	pain.	When

we	 landed	 in	 a	 regular	 dressing	 station,	 the	 M.O.	 gave	 me	 another	 going	 over and	said,

"Blighty	 for	 you,	 son."	 I	 had	 a	 piece	 of	 shrapnel	 or	 something	 through	 the right	 upper	 arm,	 clearing	 the	 bone	 and	 making	 a	 hole	 about	 as	 big	 as	 a	 half dollar.	 My	 left	 shoulder	 was	 full	 of	 shrapnel	 fragments,	 and	 began	 to	 pain	 like fury.	More	tea.	More	rum.	More	fags.	Another	faint.	When	I	woke	up	the	next

time,	somebody	was	sticking	a	hypodermic	needle	into	my	chest	with	a	shot	of

anti-lockjaw	 serum,	 and	 shortly	 after	 I	 was	 tucked	 away	 in	 a	 white	 enameled Red	 Cross	 train	 with	 a	 pretty	 nurse	 taking	 my	 temperature.	 I	 loved	 that	 nurse.

She	looked	sort	of	cool	and	holy.

I	 finally	 brought	 up	 in	 General	 Hospital	 Number	 12	 in	 Rouen.	 I	 was	 there four	days	and	had	a	real	bath,—a	genuine	boiling	out.	Also	had	some	shrapnel

picked	out	of	my	anatomy.	I	got	in	fairly	good	shape,	though	still	in	a	good	deal of	dull	pain.	It	was	a	glad	day	when	they	put	a	batch	of	us	on	a	train	for	Havre, tagged	for	Blighty.	We	went	direct	from	the	train	to	the	hospital	ship, Carisbrook Castle.	 The	 quarters	 were	 good,—real	 bunks,	 clean	 sheets,	 good	 food,	 careful nurses.	It	was	some	different	from	the	crowded	transport	that	had	taken	me	over

to	France.

There	 were	 a	 lot	 of	 German	 prisoners	 aboard,	 wounded,	 and	 we	 swapped

stories	 with	 them.	 It	 was	 really	 a	 lot	 of	 fun	 comparing	 notes,	 and	 they	 were pretty	good	chaps	on	the	whole.	They	were	as	glad	as	we	were	to	see	land.	Their

troubles	were	over	for	the	duration	of	the	war.

Never	shall	I	forget	that	wonderful	morning	when	I	looked	out	and	saw	again

the	coast	of	England,	hazy	under	the	mists	of	dawn.	It	looked	like	the	promised

land.	And	it	was.	It	meant	freedom	again	from	battle,	murder,	and	sudden	death, from	trenches	and	stenches,	rats,	cooties,	and	all	the	rest	that	goes	to	make	up	the worst	of	man-made	inventions,	war.

It	 was	 Friday	 the	 thirteenth.	 And	 don't	 let	 anybody	 dare	 say	 that	 date	 is unlucky.	For	it	brought	me	back	to	the	best	thing	that	can	gladden	the	eyes	of	a broken	Tommy.	Blighty!	Blighty!!	Blighty!!!





CHAPTER	XV

BITS	OF	BLIGHTY

Blighty	meant	life,—life	and	happiness	and	physical	comfort.	What	we	had

left	behind	over	there	was	death	and	mutilation	and	bodily	and	mental	suffering.

Up	 from	 the	 depths	 of	 hell	 we	 came	 and	 reached	 out	 our	 hands	 with	 pathetic eagerness	to	the	good	things	that	Blighty	had	for	us.

I	never	saw	a	finer	sight	than	the	faces	of	those	boys,	glowing	with	love,	as

they	 strained	 their	 eyes	 for	 the	 first	 sight	 of	 the	 homeland.	 Those	 in	 the	 bunks below,	unable	to	move,	begged	those	on	deck	to	come	down	at	the	first	land	raise and	tell	them	how	it	all	looked.

A	lump	swelled	in	my	throat,	and	I	prayed	that	I	might	never	go	back	to	the

trenches.	And	I	prayed,	too,	that	the	brave	boys	still	over	there	might	soon	be	out of	it.

We	steamed	into	the	harbor	of	Southampton	early	in	the	afternoon.	Within	an

hour	 all	 of	 those	 that	 could	 walk	 had	 gone	 ashore.	 As	 we	 got	 into	 the	 waiting trains	 the	 civilian	 populace	 cheered.	 I,	 like	 everybody	 else	 I	 suppose,	 had dreamed	often	of	coming	back	sometime	as	a	hero	and	being	greeted	as	a	hero.

But	 the	 cheering,	 though	 it	 came	 straight	 from	 the	 hearts	 of	 a	 grateful	 people, seemed,	after	all,	rather	hollow.	I	wanted	to	get	somewhere	and	rest.

It	 seemed	 good	 to	 look	 out	 of	 the	 windows	 and	 see	 the	 signs	 printed	 in English.	That	made	it	all	seem	less	like	a	dream.

I	was	taken	first	to	the	Clearing	Hospital	at	Eastleigh.	As	we	got	off	the	train there	 the	 people	 cheered	 again,	 and	 among	 the	 civilians	 were	 many	 wounded men	who	had	just	recently	come	back.	They	knew	how	we	felt.

Corporal	Holmes	with	Staff	Nurse	and	Another	Patient,	at	Fulham	Military

Hospital,	London,	S.W.

The	first	thing	at	the	hospital	was	a	real	honest-to-God	bath. In	a	tub.	With hot	water! 	Heavens,	how	I	wallowed.	The	orderly	helped	me	and	had	to	drag	me out.	I'd	have	stayed	in	that	tub	all	night	if	he	would	have	let	me.

Out	of	the	tub	I	had	clean	things	straight	through,	with	a	neat	blue	uniform, and	for	once	was	free	of	the	cooties.	The	old	uniform,	blood-stained	and	ragged, went	to	the	baking	and	disinfecting	plant.

That	night	all	of	us	newly	arrived	men	who	could	went	to	the	Y.M.C.A.	to	a

concert	 given	 in	 our	 honor.	 The	 chaplain	 came	 around	 and	 cheered	 us	 up	 and gave	us	good	fags.

Next	morning	I	went	around	to	the	M.O.	He	looked	my	arm	over	and	calmly

said	 that	 it	 would	 have	 to	 come	 off	 as	 gangrene	 had	 set	 in.	 For	 a	 moment	 I wished	that	piece	of	shrapnel	had	gone	through	my	head.	I	pictured	myself	going

around	with	only	one	arm,	and	the	prospect	didn't	look	good.

However,	 the	 doctor	 dressed	 the	 arm	 with	 the	 greatest	 care	 and	 told	 me	 I could	go	to	a	London	hospital	as	I	had	asked,	for	I	wanted	to	be	near	my	people

at	Southall.	These	were	the	friends	I	had	made	before	leaving	Blighty	and	who

had	sent	me	weekly	parcels	and	letters.

I	 arrived	 in	 London	 on	 Tuesday	 and	 was	 taken	 in	 a	 big	 Red	 Cross	 motor loaned	by	Sir	Charles	Dickerson	to	the	Fulham	Hospital	in	Hammersmith.	I	was

overjoyed,	as	the	hospital	was	very	near	Southall,	and	Mr.	and	Mrs.	Puttee	were

both	there	to	meet	me.

The	Sister	in	charge	of	my	ward,	Miss	Malin,	is	one	of	the	finest	women	I

have	met.	I	owe	it	to	her	care	and	skill	that	I	still	have	my	good	right	arm.	She has	 since	 married	 and	 the	 lucky	 man	 has	 one	 of	 the	 best	 of	 wives.	 Miss	 Malin advised	me	right	at	the	beginning	not	to	submit	to	an	amputation.

My	next	few	weeks	were	pretty	awful.	I	was	in	constant	pain,	and	after	the

old	arm	began	to	come	around	under	Miss	Malin's	treatment	one	of	the	doctors

discovered	that	my	left	hand	was	queer.	It	had	been	somewhat	swollen,	but	not

really	 bad.	 The	 doctor	 insisted	 upon	 an	 X-ray	 and	 found	 a	 bit	 of	 shrapnel imbedded.	He	was	all	for	an	operation.	Operations	seemed	to	be	the	long	suit	of

most	of	those	doctors.	I	imagine	they	couldn't	resist	the	temptation	to	get	some practice	with	so	much	cheap	material	all	about.	I	consented	this	time,	and	went

down	 for	 the	 pictures	 on	 Lord	 Mayor's	 Day.	 Going	 to	 the	 pictures	 is	 Tommy's expression	for	undergoing	an	anesthetic.

I	 was	 under	 ether	 two	 hours	 and	 a	 half,	 and	 when	 I	 came	 out	 of	 it	 the	 left hand	 was	 all	 to	 the	 bad	 and	 has	 been	 ever	 since.	 There	 followed	 weeks	 of agonizing	massage	treatments.	Between	treatments	though,	I	had	it	cushy.

My	 friends	 were	 very	 good	 to	 me,	 and	 several	 Americans	 entertained	 me	 a good	 deal.	 I	 had	 a	 permanent	 walking-out	 pass	 good	 from	 nine	 in	 the	 morning until	 nine	 at	 night.	 I	 saw	 almost	 every	 show	 in	 the	 city,	 and	 heard	 a	 special performance	of	the	Messiah	at	Westminster	Abbey.	Also	I	enjoyed	a	good	deal

of	restaurant	life.

London	is	good	to	the	wounded	men.	There	is	entertainment	for	all	of	them.

A	 good	 many	 of	 these	 slightly	 wounded	 complain	 because	 they	 cannot	 get anything	to	drink,	but	undoubtedly	it	is	the	best	thing	for	them.	It	is	against	the law	to	serve	men	in	the	blue	uniform	of	the	wounded.	Men	in	khaki	can	buy	all

the	liquor	they	want,	the	public	houses	being	open	from	noon	to	two-thirty	and

from	six	P.M.	to	nine-thirty.	Treating	is	not	allowed.	Altogether	it	works	out	very well	and	there	is	little	drunkenness	among	the	soldiers.

I	eventually	brought	up	in	a	Convalescent	Hospital	in	Brentford,	Middlesex,

and	was	there	for	three	weeks.	At	the	end	of	that	time	I	was	placed	in	category

C	3.

The	 system	 of	 marking	 the	 men	 in	 England	 is	 by	 categories,	 A,	 B,	 and	 C.

A	1,	2,	and	3	are	for	active	service.	A	4	is	for	the	under-aged.	B	categories	are for	base	 service,	 and	C	 is	 for	home	 service.	 C	 3	was	 for	 clerical	duty,	 and	 as	 I was	not	likely	to	become	efficient	again	as	a	soldier,	it	looked	like	some	kind	of bookkeeping	for	me	for	the	duration	of	the	war.

Unless	 one	 is	 all	 shot	 to	 pieces,	 literally	 with	 something	 gone,	 it	 is	 hard	 to get	a	discharge	from	the	British	army.	Back	in	the	early	days	of	1915,	a	leg	off was	about	the	only	thing	that	would	produce	a	discharge.

When	 I	 was	 put	 at	 clerical	 duty,	 I	 immediately	 began	 to	 furnish	 trouble	 for the	British	army,	not	intentionally,	of	course,	but	quite	effectively.	The	first	thing I	 did	 was	 to	 drop	 a	 typewriter	 and	 smash	 it.	 My	 hands	 had	 spells	 when	 they absolutely	 refused	 to	 work.	 Usually	 it	 was	 when	 I	 had	 something	 breakable	 in them.	After	I	had	done	about	two	hundred	dollars'	damage	indoors	they	tried	me

out	as	bayonet	instructor.	I	immediately	dropped	a	rifle	on	a	concrete	walk	and

smashed	 it.	 They	 wanted	 me	 to	 pay	 for	 it,	 but	 the	 M.O.	 called	 attention	 to	 the fact	that	I	shouldn't	have	been	put	at	the	work	under	my	category.

Corporal	Holmes	with	Company	Office	Force,	at	Winchester,	England,	a	Week

Prior	to	Discharge.

They	then	put	me	back	at	bookkeeping	at	Command	Headquarters,	Salisbury,

but	I	couldn't	figure	English	money	and	had	a	bad	habit	of	fainting	and	falling off	the	high	stool.	To	cap	the	climax,	I	finally	fell	one	day	and	knocked	down	the stovepipe,	and	nearly	set	the	office	afire.	The	M.O.	then	ordered	me	back	to	the depot	 at	 Winchester	 and	 recommended	 me	 for	 discharge.	 I	 guess	 he	 thought	 it would	be	the	cheapest	in	the	long	run.

The	adjutant	at	Winchester	didn't	seem	any	too	pleased	to	see	me.	He	said	I

looked	as	healthy	as	a	wolf,	which	I	did,	and	that	they	would	never	let	me	out	of the	army.	He	seemed	to	think	that	my	quite	normal	appearance	would	be	looked

upon	 as	 a	 personal	 insult	 by	 the	 medical	 board.	 I	 said	 that	 I	 was	 sorry	 I	 didn't have	a	leg	or	two	gone,	but	it	couldn't	be	helped.

While	 waiting	 for	 the	 Board,	 I	 was	 sent	 to	 the	 German	 Prison	 Camp	 at Winnal	 Downs	 as	 corporal	 of	 the	 permanent	 guard.	 I	 began	 to	 fear	 that	 at	 last they	 had	 found	 something	 that	 I	 could	 do	 without	 damaging	 anything,	 and	 my visions	of	the	U.S.A.	went	a-glimmering.	I	was	with	the	Fritzies	for	over	a	week, and	they	certainly	have	it	soft	and	cushy.

They	have	as	good	food	as	the	Tommies.	They	are	paid	ninepence	a	day,	and

the	work	they	do	is	a	joke.	They	are	well	housed	and	kept	clean	and	have	their

own	 canteens,	 where	 they	 can	 buy	 almost	 anything	 in	 the	 way	 of	 delicacies.

They	are	decently	treated	by	the	English	soldiers,	who	even	buy	them	fags	out	of their	own	money.	The	nearest	thing	I	ever	saw	to	humiliation	of	a	German	was	a

few	 good-natured	 jokes	 at	 their	 expense	 by	 some	 of	 the	 wits	 in	 the	 guard.	 The English	know	how	to	play	fair	with	an	enemy	when	they	have	him	down.

I	 had	 about	 given	 up	 hope	 of	 ever	 getting	 out	 of	 the	 army	 when	 I	 was summoned	to	appear	before	the	Travelling	Medical	Board.	You	can	wager	I	lost

no	time	in	appearing.

The	 board	 looked	 me	 over	 with	 a	 discouraging	 and	 cynical	 suspicion.	 I certainly	did	look	as	rugged	as	a	navvy.	When	they	gave	me	a	going	over,	they

found	that	my	heart	was	out	of	place	and	that	my	left	hand	might	never	limber

up	again.	They	voted	for	a	discharge	in	jig	time.	I	had	all	I	could	do	to	keep	from howling	with	joy.

It	was	some	weeks	before	the	final	formalities	were	closed	up.	The	pension

board	 passed	 on	 my	 case,	 and	 I	 was	 given	 the	 magnificent	 sum	 of	 sixteen shillings	 and	 sixpence	 a	 week,	 or	 $3.75.	 I	 spent	 the	 next	 few	 weeks	 in	 visiting my	 friends	 and,	 eventually,	 at	 the	 22nd	 Headquarters	 at	 Bermondsey,	 London, S.C.,	received	the	papers	that	once	more	made	me	a	free	man.

The	papers	read	in	part,	"He	is	discharged	in	consequence	of	paragraph	392, King's	Rules	and	Regulations.	No	longer	fit	for	service."	In	another	part	of	the book	 you	 will	 find	 a	 reproduction	 of	 the	 character	 discharge	 also	 given.	 The discharged	 man	 also	 receives	 a	 little	 silver	 badge	 bearing	 the	 inscription,	 "For King	and	Empire,	Services	Rendered."	I	think	that	I	value	this	badge	more	than any	other	possession.

Once	 free,	 I	 lost	 no	 time	 in	 getting	 my	 passport	 into	 shape	 and	 engaged	 a passage	 on	 the	 St.	 Paul,	 to	 sail	 on	 the	 second	 of	 June.	 Since	 my	 discharge	 is dated	 the	 twenty-eighth	 of	 May,	 you	 can	 see	 that	 I	 didn't	 waste	 any	 time.	 My friends	at	Southall	thought	I	was	doing	things	in	a	good	deal	of	a	hurry.	The	fact is,	 I	 was	 fed	 up	 on	 war.	 I	 had	 had	 a	 plenty.	 And	 I	 was	 going	 to	 make	 my	 get-away	 before	 the	 British	 War	 Office	 changed	 its	 mind	 and	 got	 me	 back	 in uniform.	 Mrs.	 Puttee	 and	 her	 eldest	 son	 saw	 me	 off	 at	 Euston	 Station.	 Leaving them	was	the	one	wrench,	as	they	had	become	very	dear	to	me.	But	I	had	to	go.

If	Blighty	had	looked	good,	the	thought	of	the	U.S.A.	was	better.

My	 passage	 was	 uneventful.	 No	 submarines,	 no	 bad	 weather,	 nothing

disagreeable.	On	the	eighth	day	I	looked	out	through	a	welter	of	fog	and	rain	to the	place	where	the	Statue	of	Liberty	should	have	been	waving	a	greeting	across

New	York	harbor.	The	lady	wasn't	visible,	but	I	knew	she	was	there.	And	even	in

a	downpour	equal	to	anything	furnished	by	the	choicest	of	Flanders	rainstorms,

little	 old	 New	 York	 looked	 better	 than	 anything	 I	 could	 imagine,	 except	 sober and	staid	old	Boston.

That	 I	 am	 at	 home,	 safe	 and	 free	 of	 the	 horrors	 of	 war,	 is	 to	 me	 a	 strange thing.	 I	 think	 it	 comes	 into	 the	 experience	 of	 most	 of	 the	 men	 who	 have	 been over	there	and	who	have	been	invalided	out	of	the	service.	Looking	back	on	the

awfulness	of	the	trenches	and	the	agonies	of	mind	and	body,	the	sacrifice	seems

to	fade	into	insignificance	beside	the	satisfaction	of	having	done	a	bit	in	the	great and	just	cause.

Now	that	our	own	men	are	going	over,	I	find	myself	with	a	very	deep	regret

that	I	cannot	go	too.	I	can	only	wish	them	the	best	of	luck	and	rest	in	confidence that	every	man	will	do	his	uttermost.





CHAPTER	XVI

SUGGESTIONS	FOR	"SAMMY"

I	 cannot	 end	 this	 book	 without	 saying	 something	 to	 those	 who	 have	 boys over	there	and,	what	is	more	to	the	point,	to	those	boys	who	may	go	over	there.

First	 as	 to	 the	 things	 that	 should	 be	 sent	 in	 parcels;	 and	 a	 great	 deal	 of consideration	 should	 be	 given	 to	 this.	 You	 must	 be	 very	 careful	 not	 to	 send things	that	will	load	your	Sammy	down,	as	every	ounce	counts	in	the	pack	when

he	is	hiking,	and	he	is	likely	to	be	hiking	any	time	or	all	the	time.

In	the	line	of	eatables	the	soldier	wants	something	sweet.	Good	hard	cookies

are	all	right.	I	wish	more	people	in	this	country	knew	how	to	make	the	English

plum	 pudding	 in	 bags,	 the	 kind	 that	 will	 keep	 forever	 and	 be	 good	 when	 it	 is boiled.	Mainly,	though,	chocolate	is	the	thing.	The	milk	kind	is	well	enough,	but it	 is	 apt	 to	 cause	 overmuch	 thirst.	 Personally	 I	 would	 rather	 have	 the	 plain chocolate,—the	water	variety.

Chewing	gum	is	always	in	demand	and	is	not	bulky	in	the	package.	Send	a

lot	of	it.	Lime	and	lemon	tablets	in	the	summertime	are	great	for	checking	thirst on	the	march.	A	few	of	them	won't	do	any	harm	in	any	parcel,	summer	or	winter.

Now	 about	 smoking	 materials.	 Unless	 the	 man	 to	 whom	 the	 parcel	 is	 to	 be sent	is	definitely	known	to	be	prejudiced	against	cigarettes,	don't	send	him	pipe tobacco	or	a	pipe.	There	are	smokers	who	hate	cigarettes	just	as	there	are	some

people	who	think	that	the	little	paper	roll	is	an	invention	of	the	devil.	If	any	one has	 a	 boy	 over	 there,	 he—or	 she—had	 better	 overcome	 any	 possible	 personal feeling	against	the	use	of	cigarettes	and	send	them	in	preference	to	anything	else.

From	my	own	experience	I	know	that	cigarettes	are	the	most	important	thing

that	can	be	sent	to	a	soldier.	When	I	went	out	there,	I	was	a	pipe	smoker.	After	I had	been	in	the	trenches	a	week	I	quit	the	pipe	and	threw	it	away.	It	is	seldom

enough	 that	 one	 has	 the	 opportunity	 to	 enjoy	 a	 full	 pipe.	 It	 is	 very	 hard	 to	 get lighted	 when	 the	 matches	 are	 wet	 in	 bad	 weather,	 which	 is	 nearly	 always.

Besides	 which,	 say	 what	 you	 will,	 a	 pipe	 does	 not	 soothe	 the	 nerves	 as	 a	 fag does.

Now	when	sending	the	cigarettes	out,	don't	try	to	think	of	the	special	brand that	 Harold	 or	 Percival	 used	 when	 he	 was	 home.	 Likely	 enough	 his	 name	 has changed,	and	instead	of	being	Percy	or	Harold	he	is	now	Pigeye	or	Sour-belly;

and	 his	 taste	 in	 the	 weed	 has	 changed	 too.	 He	 won't	 be	 so	 keen	 on	 his	 own particular	brand	of	Turkish.	Just	send	him	the	common	or	garden	Virginia	sort	at five	cents	the	package.	That	is	the	kind	that	gives	most	comfort	to	the	outworn

Tommy	or	Sammy.

Don't	think	that	you	can	send	too	many.	I	have	had	five	hundred	sent	to	me

in	a	week	many	times	and	have	none	left	at	the	end.	There	are	always	men	who

do	not	get	any	parcels,	and	they	have	to	be	looked	out	for.	Out	there	all	things are	 common	 property,	 and	 the	 soldier	 shares	 his	 last	 with	 his	 less	 fortunate comrade.	Subscribe	when	you	get	the	chance	to	any	and	all	smoke	funds.

Don't	 listen	 to	 the	 pestilential	 fuddy-duds	 who	 do	 not	 approve	 of	 tobacco, particularly	 the	 fussy-old-maids.	 Personally,	 when	 I	 hear	 any	 of	 these

conscientious	objectors	to	My	Lady	Nicotine	air	their	opinions,	I	wish	that	they could	be	placed	in	the	trenches	for	a	while.	They	would	soon	change	their	minds

about	rum	issues	and	tobacco,	and	I'll	wager	they	would	be	first	in	the	line	when the	issues	came	around.

One	thing	that	many	people	forget	to	put	in	the	soldier's	parcel,	or	don't	see

the	 point	 of,	 is	 talcum	 powder.	 Razors	 get	 dull	 very	 quickly,	 and	 the	 face	 gets sore.	 The	 powder	 is	 almost	 a	 necessity	 when	 one	 is	 shaving	 in	 luke-warm	 tea and	laundry	soap,	with	a	safety	razor	blade	that	wasn't	sharp	in	the	first	place.	In the	summer	on	the	march	men	sweat	and	accumulate	all	the	dirt	there	is	in	the

world.	There	are	forty	hitherto	unsuspected	places	on	the	body	that	chafe	under

the	weight	of	equipment.	Talc	helps.	In	the	matter	of	sore	feet,	it	is	a	life	saver.

Soap,—don't	 forget	 that.	 Always	 some	 good,	 pure,	 plain	 white	 soap,	 like Ivory	or	Castile;	and	a	small	bath	towel	now	and	then.	There	is	so	little	chance	to wash	towels	that	they	soon	get	unusable.

In	the	way	of	wearing	apparel,	socks	are	always	good.	But,	girlie,	make	'em

right.	That	last	pair	sent	me	nearly	cost	me	a	court	martial	by	my	getting	my	feet into	trench-foot	condition.	If	you	can't	leave	out	the	seams,	wear	them	yourself for	a	while,	and	see	how	you	like	it.

Sleeveless	 sweaters	 are	 good	 and	 easy	 to	 make,	 I	 am	 told.	 They	 don't	 last long	at	the	best,	so	should	not	be	elaborate.	Any	garment	worn	close	to	the	body gets	cooty	in	a	few	weeks	and	has	to	be	ditched.	However,	keep	right	on	with	the

knitting,	with	the	exception	of	the	socks.	If	you're	not	an	expert	on	those,	better buy	 them.	 You	 may	 in	 that	 way	 retain	 the	 affection	 of	 your	 sweetheart	 over there.

Knitted	helmets	are	a	great	comfort.	I	had	one	that	was	fine	not	only	to	wear

under	the	tin	hat	but	to	sleep	in.	I	am	not	keen	on	wristlets	or	gloves.	Better	buy the	gloves	you	send	in	the	shops.	So	that's	the	knitted	stuff,—helmets,	sweaters, and	mufflers	and,	for	the	expert,	socks.

Be	very	moderate	in	the	matter	of	reading	matter.	I	mean	by	that,	don't	send	a

lot	at	a	time	or	any	very	bulky	stuff	at	all.

If	it	is	possible	to	get	a	louse	pomade	called	Harrison's	in	this	country,	send

it,	as	it	is	a	cooty	killer.	So	far	as	I	know,	it	is	the	only	thing	sold	that	will	do	the cooty	in.	There's	a	fortune	waiting	for	the	one	who	compounds	a	louse	eradicator that	will	kill	the	cooty	and	not	irritate	or	nearly	kill	the	one	who	uses	it.	I	shall expect	 a	 royalty	 from	 the	 successful	 chemist	 who	 produces	 the	 much	 needed compound.

For	 the	 wealthier	 people,	 I	 would	 suggest	 that	 good	 things	 to	 send	 are	 silk shirts	 and	 drawers.	 It	 is	 possible	 to	 get	 the	 cooties	 out	 of	 these	 garments	 much easier	 than	 out	 of	 the	 thick	 woollies.	 There	 are	 many	 other	 things	 that	 may	 be sent,	 but	 I	 have	 mentioned	 the	 most	 important.	 The	 main	 thing	 to	 remember	 is not	 to	 run	 to	 bulk.	 And	 don't	 forget	 that	 it	 takes	 a	 long	 time	 for	 stuff	 to	 get across.

Don't	 overlook	 the	 letters,—this	 especially	 if	 you	 are	 a	 mother,	 wife,	 or sweetheart.	 It	 is	 an	 easy	 thing	 to	 forget.	 You	 mustn't.	 Out	 there	 life	 is	 chiefly squalor,	 filth,	 and	 stench.	 The	 boy	 gets	 disgusted	 and	 lonesome	 and	 homesick, even	 though	 he	 may	 write	 to	 the	 contrary.	 Write	 to	 him	 at	 least	 three	 times	 a week.	 Always	 write	 cheerfully,	 even	 although	 something	 may	 have	 happened that	 has	 plunged	 you	 into	 the	 depths	 of	 despair.	 If	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 cover	 up something	that	would	cause	a	soldier	worry,	cover	it	up.	Even	lie	to	him.	It	will be	justified.	Keep	in	mind	the	now	famous,	war	song,	"Pack	up	your	troubles	in your	 old	 kit	 bag	 and	 smile,	 smile,	 smile."	 Keep	 your	 own	 packed	 up	 and	 don't send	any	over	there	for	some	soldier	to	worry	over.

Just	 a	 few	 words	 to	 the	 men	 themselves	 who	 may	 go.	 Don't	 take	 elaborate shaving	tackle,	just	brush,	razor,	soap,	and	a	small	mirror.	Most	of	the	time	you won't	need	the	mirror.	You'll	use	the	periscope	mirror	in	the	trenches.	Don't	load up	on	books	and	unnecessary	clothing.	Impress	it	upon	your	relatives	that	your





stuff,	 tobacco	 and	 sweets,	 is	 to	 come	 along	 in	 small	 parcels	 and	 often	 and regularly.	Let	all	your	friends	and	relatives	know	your	address	and	ask	them	to

write	 often.	 Don't	 hesitate	 to	 tell	 them	 all	 that	 a	 parcel	 now	 and	 again	 will	 be acceptable.	Have	more	than	one	source	of	supply	if	possible.

When	 you	 get	 out	 there,	 hunt	 up	 the	 Y.M.C.A.	 huts.	 You	 will	 find	 good cheer,	 warmth,	 music,	 and	 above	 all	 a	 place	 to	 do	 your	 writing.	 Write	 home often.	 Your	 people	 are	 concerned	 about	 you	 all	 the	 time.	 Write	 at	 least	 once	 a week	to	the	one	nearest	and	dearest	to	you.	I	used	to	average	ten	letters	a	week	to friends	in	Blighty	and	back	here,	and	that	was	a	lot	more	than	I	was	allowed.	I

found	a	way.	Most	of	you	won't	be	able	to	go	over	your	allowance.	But	do	go	the

limit.

Over	there	you	will	find	a	lot	of	attractive	girls	and	women.	Most	any	girl	is

attractive	when	you	are	just	out	of	the	misery	of	the	trenches.	Be	careful	of	them.

Remember	the	country	has	been	full	of	soldiers	for	three	years.	Don't	make	love

too	easily.	One	of	the	singers	in	the	Divisional	Follies	recently	revived	the	once popular	music-hall	song,	"If	You	Can't	Be	Good	Be	Careful."	It	should	appeal	to the	soldier	as	much	as	"Smile,	smile,	smile",	and	is	equally	good	advice.	For	the sake	 of	 those	 at	 home	 and	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 your	 own	 peace	 of	 mind	 come	 back from	overseas	clean.

After	all	it	is	possible	to	no	more	than	give	hints	to	the	boys	who	are	going.

All	of	you	will	have	to	learn	by	experience.	My	parting	word	to	you	all	is	just,

"The	best	of	luck."

GLOSSARY	OF	ARMY	SLANG

All	around	traverse—A	machine	gun	placed	on	a	swivel	to	turn	in

any	direction.

Ammo—Ammunition.	 Usually	 for	 rifles,	 though	 occasionally	 used

to	indicate	that	for	artillery.

Argue	the	toss—Argue	the	point.

Back	of	the	line—Anywhere	to	the	rear	and	out	of	the	danger	zone.

Barbed	 wire—Ordinary	 barbed	 wire	 used	 for	 entanglements.	 A thicker	and	heavier	military	wire	is	sometimes	used.

Barrage—Shells	dropped	simultaneously	and	in	a	row	so	as	to	form

a	curtain	of	fire.	Literal	translation	"a	barrier."

Bashed—Smashed.

Big	boys—Big	guns	or	the	shells	they	send	over.

Big	push—The	battles	of	the	Somme.

Billets—The	 quarters	 of	 the	 soldier	 when	 back	 of	 the	 line.	 Any

place	from	a	pigpen	to	a	palace.

Bleeder	 or	 Blighter—Cockney	 slang	 for	 fellow.	 Roughly

corresponding	to	American	"guy."

Blighty—England.	 East	 Indian	 derivation.	 The	 paradise	 looked

forward	to	by	all	good	soldiers,—and	all	bad	ones	too.

Blighty	one—A	wound	that	will	take	the	soldier	to	Blighty.

Bloody—The	 universal	 Cockney	 adjective.	 It	 is	 vaguely	 supposed

to	be	highly	obscene,	though	just	why	nobody	seems	to	know.

Blooming—A	 meaningless	 and	 greatly	 used	 adjective.	 Applied	 to

anything	and	everything.

Bomb—A	hand	grenade.

Bully	 beef—Corned	 beef,	 high	 grade	 and	 good	 of	 the	 kind,	 if	 you like	the	kind.	It	sets	hard	on	the	chest.

Carry	on—To	go	ahead	with	the	matter	in	hand.

Char—Tea.	East	Indian	derivation.

Chat—Officers'	term	for	cootie;	supposed	to	be	more	delicate.

Click—Variously	used.	To	die.	To	be	killed.	To	kill.	To	draw	some

disagreeable	job,	as:	I	clicked	a	burial	fatigue.

Communication	trench—A	trench	leading	up	to	the	front	trench.

Consolidate—To	turn	around	and	prepare	for	occupation	a	captured

trench.

Cootie—The	common,—the	too	common,—body	louse.	Everybody

has	'em.

Crater—A	 round	 pit	 made	 by	 an	 underground	 explosion	 or	 by	 a

shell.

Cushy—Easy.	Soft.

Dixie—An	oblong	iron	pot	or	box	fitting	into	a	field	kitchen.	Used

for	 cooking	 anything	 and	 everything.	 Nobody	 seems	 to	 know

why	it	is	so	called.

Doggo—Still.	Quiet.	East	Indian	derivation.

Doing	in—Killing.

Doss—Sleep.

Duck	walk—A	slatted	wooden	walk	in	soft	ground.

Dud—An	unexploded	shell.	A	dangerous	thing	to	fool	with.

Dug-out—A	 hole	 more	 or	 less	 deep	 in	 the	 side	 of	 a	 trench	 where soldiers	are	supposed	to	rest.

Dump—A	place	where	supplies	are	left	for	distribution.

Entrenching	 tool—A	 sort	 of	 small	 shovel	 for	 quick	 digging.

Carried	as	part	of	equipment.

Estaminet—A	French	saloon	or	cafe.

Fag—A	cigarette.

Fatigue—Any	kind	of	work	except	manning	the	trenches.

Fed	up—Tommy's	way	of	saying	"too	much	is	enough."

Firing	step—A	narrow	ledge	running	along	the	parapet	on	which	a

soldier	stands	to	look	over	the	top.

Flare—A	star	light	sent	up	from	a	pistol	to	light	up	out	in	front.

Fritz—An	affectionate	term	for	our	friend	the	enemy.

Funk	hole—A	dug-out.

Gas—Any	poisonous	gas	sent	across	when	the	wind	is	right.	Used

by	both	sides.	Invented	by	the	Germans.

Goggles—A	 piece	 of	 equipment	 similar	 to	 that	 used	 by	 motorists,

supposed	to	keep	off	tear	gas.	The	rims	are	backed	with	strips	of

sponge	 which	 Tommy	 tears	 off	 and	 throws	 the	 goggle	 frame away.

Go	west—To	die.

Grouse—Complain.	Growl.	Kick.

Hun—A	German.

Identification	 disc—A	 fiber	 tablet	 bearing	 the	 soldier's	 name,

regiment,	and	rank.	Worn	around	the	neck	on	a	string.

Iron	 rations—About	 two	 pounds	 of	 nonperishable	 rations	 to	 be

used	in	an	emergency.

Knuckle	knife—A	short	dagger	with	a	studded	hilt.	Invented	by	the

Germans.

Lance	Corporal—The	lowest	grade	of	non-commissioned	officer.

Lewis	 gun—A	 very	 light	 machine	 gun	 invented	 by	 one	 Lewis,	 an

officer	in	the	American	army.

Light	railway—A	very	narrow-gauge	railway	on	which	are	pushed

little	hand	cars.

Listening	 post—One	 or	 more	 men	 go	 out	 in	 front,	 at	 night,	 of

course,	and	listen	for	movements	by	the	enemy.

Maconochie—A	 scientifically	 compounded	 and	 well-balanced

ration,	 so	 the	 authorities	 say.	 It	 looks,	 smells,	 and	 tastes	 like

rancid	lard.

M.O. —Medical	 Officer.	 A	 foxy	 cove	 who	 can't	 be	 fooled	 with

faked	symptoms.

Mess	tin—A	combination	teapot,	fry	pan,	and	plate.

Military	cross—An	officer's	decoration	for	bravery.

Military	medal—A	decoration	for	bravery	given	to	enlisted	men.

Mills—The	most	commonly	used	hand	grenade.

Minnies—German	trench	mortar	projectiles.

Napper—The	head.

Night	'ops—A	much	hated	practice	manoeuvre	done	at	night.

No	Man's	Land—The	area	between	the	trenches.

On	your	own—At	liberty.	Your	time	is	your	own.

Out	or	over	there—Somewhere	in	France.

Parados—The	back	wall	of	a	trench.

Parapet—The	front	wall	of	a	trench.

Patrol—One	 or	 more	 men	 who	 go	 out	 in	 front	 and	 prowl	 in	 the

dark,	seeking	information	of	the	enemy.

Periscope—A	 boxlike	 arrangement	 with	 two	 mirrors	 for	 looking

over	the	top	without	exposing	the	napper.

Persuader—A	short	club	with	a	nail-studded	head.

Pip	squeak—A	German	shell	which	makes	that	kind	of	noise	when

it	comes	over.

Push	up	the	daisies—To	be	killed	and	buried.

Ration	party—A	party	of	men	which	goes	to	the	rear	and	brings	up

rations	for	the	front	line.

Rest—Relief	 from	 trench	 service.	 Mostly	 one	 works	 constantly

when	"resting."

Ruddy—Same	as	bloody,	but	not	quite	so	bad.

Sandbag—A	bag	which	is	filled	with	mud	and	used	for	building	the

parapet.

Sentry	 go—Time	 on	 guard	 in	 the	 front	 trench,	 or	 at	 rest	 at

headquarters.

Shell	hole—A	pit	made	by	the	explosion	of	a	shell.

Souvenir—Any	kind	of	junk	picked	up	for	keepsakes.	Also	used	as

a	begging	word	by	the	French	children.

Stand	to—Order	for	all	men	to	stand	ready	in	the	trench	in	event	of

a	surprise	attack,	usually	at	sundown	and	sunrise.

Stand	down—Countermanding	"stand	to."

Stokes—A	 bomb	 weighing	 about	 eleven	 pounds	 usually	 thrown

from	a	mortar,	but	sometimes	used	by	hand.

Strafing—One	of	the	few	words	Tommy	has	borrowed	from	Fritz.

To	punish.

Suicide	club—The	battalion	bombers.

Tin	hat—Steel	helmet.

Wave—A	line	of	men	going	over	the	top.

Whacked—Exhausted.	Played	out.

Whiz-bang—A	German	shell	that	makes	that	sort	of	noise.

Wind	up	or	windy—Nervous.	Jumpy.	Temporary	involuntary	fear.

Wooden	 cross—The	 small	 wooden	 cross	 placed	 over	 a	 soldier's

grave.

End	of	Project	Gutenberg's	A	Yankee	in	the	Trenches,	by	R.	Derby	Holmes

***	END	OF	THIS	PROJECT	GUTENBERG	EBOOK	A	YANKEE	IN	THE	TRENCHES	***

*****	This	file	should	be	named	13279-h.htm	or	13279-h.zip	*****

This	and	all	associated	files	of	various	formats	will	be	found	in:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/2/7/13279/

Produced	by	Janet	Kegg	and	the	Project	Gutenberg	Online	Distributed

Proofreading	Team

Updated	editions	will	replace	the	previous	one--the	old	editions

will	be	renamed.

Creating	the	works	from	public	domain	print	editions	means	that	no

one	owns	a	United	States	copyright	in	these	works,	so	the	Foundation

(and	you!)	can	copy	and	distribute	it	in	the	United	States	without

permission	and	without	paying	copyright	royalties.		Special	rules,

set	forth	in	the	General	Terms	of	Use	part	of	this	license,	apply	to

copying	and	distributing	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	to

protect	the	PROJECT	GUTENBERG-tm	concept	and	trademark.		Project

Gutenberg	is	a	registered	trademark,	and	may	not	be	used	if	you

charge	for	the	eBooks,	unless	you	receive	specific	permission.		If	you

do	not	charge	anything	for	copies	of	this	eBook,	complying	with	the

rules	is	very	easy.		You	may	use	this	eBook	for	nearly	any	purpose

such	as	creation	of	derivative	works,	reports,	performances	and

research.		They	may	be	modified	and	printed	and	given	away--you	may	do

practically	ANYTHING	with	public	domain	eBooks.		Redistribution	is

subject	to	the	trademark	license,	especially	commercial

redistribution.

***	START:	FULL	LICENSE	***

THE	FULL	PROJECT	GUTENBERG	LICENSE

PLEASE	READ	THIS	BEFORE	YOU	DISTRIBUTE	OR	USE	THIS	WORK

To	protect	the	Project	Gutenberg-tm	mission	of	promoting	the	free

distribution	of	electronic	works,	by	using	or	distributing	this	work

(or	any	other	work	associated	in	any	way	with	the	phrase	"Project

Gutenberg"),	you	agree	to	comply	with	all	the	terms	of	the	Full	Project

Gutenberg-tm	License	(available	with	this	file	or	online	at

http://gutenberg.net/license).

Section	1.		General	Terms	of	Use	and	Redistributing	Project	Gutenberg-tm

electronic	works

1.A.		By	reading	or	using	any	part	of	this	Project	Gutenberg-tm

electronic	work,	you	indicate	that	you	have	read,	understand,	agree	to

and	accept	all	the	terms	of	this	license	and	intellectual	property

(trademark/copyright)	agreement.		If	you	do	not	agree	to	abide	by	all

the	terms	of	this	agreement,	you	must	cease	using	and	return	or	destroy

all	copies	of	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	in	your	possession.

If	you	paid	a	fee	for	obtaining	a	copy	of	or	access	to	a	Project

Gutenberg-tm	electronic	work	and	you	do	not	agree	to	be	bound	by	the

terms	of	this	agreement,	you	may	obtain	a	refund	from	the	person	or

entity	to	whom	you	paid	the	fee	as	set	forth	in	paragraph	1.E.8.

1.B.		"Project	Gutenberg"	is	a	registered	trademark.		It	may	only	be

used	on	or	associated	in	any	way	with	an	electronic	work	by	people	who

agree	to	be	bound	by	the	terms	of	this	agreement.		There	are	a	few

things	that	you	can	do	with	most	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic	works

even	without	complying	with	the	full	terms	of	this	agreement.		See

paragraph	1.C	below.		There	are	a	lot	of	things	you	can	do	with	Project

Gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	if	you	follow	the	terms	of	this	agreement

and	help	preserve	free	future	access	to	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic

works.		See	paragraph	1.E	below.

1.C.		The	Project	Gutenberg	Literary	Archive	Foundation	("the	Foundation"

or	PGLAF),	owns	a	compilation	copyright	in	the	collection	of	Project

Gutenberg-tm	electronic	works.		Nearly	all	the	individual	works	in	the

collection	are	in	the	public	domain	in	the	United	States.		If	an

individual	work	is	in	the	public	domain	in	the	United	States	and	you	are

located	in	the	United	States,	we	do	not	claim	a	right	to	prevent	you	from

copying,	distributing,	performing,	displaying	or	creating	derivative

works	based	on	the	work	as	long	as	all	references	to	Project	Gutenberg

are	removed.		Of	course,	we	hope	that	you	will	support	the	Project

Gutenberg-tm	mission	of	promoting	free	access	to	electronic	works	by

freely	sharing	Project	Gutenberg-tm	works	in	compliance	with	the	terms	of

this	agreement	for	keeping	the	Project	Gutenberg-tm	name	associated	with

the	work.		You	can	easily	comply	with	the	terms	of	this	agreement	by

keeping	this	work	in	the	same	format	with	its	attached	full	Project

Gutenberg-tm	License	when	you	share	it	without	charge	with	others.

1.D.		The	copyright	laws	of	the	place	where	you	are	located	also	govern

what	you	can	do	with	this	work.		Copyright	laws	in	most	countries	are	in

a	constant	state	of	change.		If	you	are	outside	the	United	States,	check

the	laws	of	your	country	in	addition	to	the	terms	of	this	agreement

before	downloading,	copying,	displaying,	performing,	distributing	or

creating	derivative	works	based	on	this	work	or	any	other	Project

Gutenberg-tm	work.		The	Foundation	makes	no	representations	concerning the	copyright	status	of	any	work	in	any	country	outside	the	United

States.

1.E.		Unless	you	have	removed	all	references	to	Project	Gutenberg:

1.E.1.		The	following	sentence,	with	active	links	to,	or	other	immediate

access	to,	the	full	Project	Gutenberg-tm	License	must	appear	prominently

whenever	any	copy	of	a	Project	Gutenberg-tm	work	(any	work	on	which	the

phrase	"Project	Gutenberg"	appears,	or	with	which	the	phrase	"Project Gutenberg"	is	associated)	is	accessed,	displayed,	performed,	viewed,

copied	or	distributed:

This	eBook	is	for	the	use	of	anyone	anywhere	at	no	cost	and	with

almost	no	restrictions	whatsoever.		You	may	copy	it,	give	it	away	or

re-use	it	under	the	terms	of	the	Project	Gutenberg	License	included

with	this	eBook	or	online	at	www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.		If	an	individual	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic	work	is	derived

from	the	public	domain	(does	not	contain	a	notice	indicating	that	it	is

posted	with	permission	of	the	copyright	holder),	the	work	can	be	copied

and	distributed	to	anyone	in	the	United	States	without	paying	any	fees

or	charges.		If	you	are	redistributing	or	providing	access	to	a	work

with	the	phrase	"Project	Gutenberg"	associated	with	or	appearing	on	the work,	you	must	comply	either	with	the	requirements	of	paragraphs	1.E.1

through	1.E.7	or	obtain	permission	for	the	use	of	the	work	and	the

Project	Gutenberg-tm	trademark	as	set	forth	in	paragraphs	1.E.8	or

1.E.9.

1.E.3.		If	an	individual	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic	work	is	posted

with	the	permission	of	the	copyright	holder,	your	use	and	distribution

must	comply	with	both	paragraphs	1.E.1	through	1.E.7	and	any	additional

terms	imposed	by	the	copyright	holder.		Additional	terms	will	be	linked

to	the	Project	Gutenberg-tm	License	for	all	works	posted	with	the

permission	of	the	copyright	holder	found	at	the	beginning	of	this	work.

1.E.4.		Do	not	unlink	or	detach	or	remove	the	full	Project	Gutenberg-tm

License	terms	from	this	work,	or	any	files	containing	a	part	of	this

work	or	any	other	work	associated	with	Project	Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.		Do	not	copy,	display,	perform,	distribute	or	redistribute	this

electronic	work,	or	any	part	of	this	electronic	work,	without

prominently	displaying	the	sentence	set	forth	in	paragraph	1.E.1	with

active	links	or	immediate	access	to	the	full	terms	of	the	Project

Gutenberg-tm	License.

1.E.6.		You	may	convert	to	and	distribute	this	work	in	any	binary,

compressed,	marked	up,	nonproprietary	or	proprietary	form,	including	any

word	processing	or	hypertext	form.		However,	if	you	provide	access	to	or

distribute	copies	of	a	Project	Gutenberg-tm	work	in	a	format	other	than

"Plain	Vanilla	ASCII"	or	other	format	used	in	the	official	version

posted	on	the	official	Project	Gutenberg-tm	web	site	(www.gutenberg.net),

you	must,	at	no	additional	cost,	fee	or	expense	to	the	user,	provide	a

copy,	a	means	of	exporting	a	copy,	or	a	means	of	obtaining	a	copy	upon

request,	of	the	work	in	its	original	"Plain	Vanilla	ASCII"	or	other

form.		Any	alternate	format	must	include	the	full	Project	Gutenberg-tm

License	as	specified	in	paragraph	1.E.1.

1.E.7.		Do	not	charge	a	fee	for	access	to,	viewing,	displaying,

performing,	copying	or	distributing	any	Project	Gutenberg-tm	works

unless	you	comply	with	paragraph	1.E.8	or	1.E.9.

1.E.8.		You	may	charge	a	reasonable	fee	for	copies	of	or	providing

access	to	or	distributing	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	provided

that

-	You	pay	a	royalty	fee	of	20%	of	the	gross	profits	you	derive	from

the	use	of	Project	Gutenberg-tm	works	calculated	using	the	method

you	already	use	to	calculate	your	applicable	taxes.		The	fee	is

owed	to	the	owner	of	the	Project	Gutenberg-tm	trademark,	but	he

has	agreed	to	donate	royalties	under	this	paragraph	to	the

Project	Gutenberg	Literary	Archive	Foundation.		Royalty	payments

must	be	paid	within	60	days	following	each	date	on	which	you

prepare	(or	are	legally	required	to	prepare)	your	periodic	tax

returns.		Royalty	payments	should	be	clearly	marked	as	such	and

sent	to	the	Project	Gutenberg	Literary	Archive	Foundation	at	the

address	specified	in	Section	4,	"Information	about	donations	to

the	Project	Gutenberg	Literary	Archive	Foundation."

-	You	provide	a	full	refund	of	any	money	paid	by	a	user	who	notifies

you	in	writing	(or	by	e-mail)	within	30	days	of	receipt	that	s/he

does	not	agree	to	the	terms	of	the	full	Project	Gutenberg-tm

License.		You	must	require	such	a	user	to	return	or

destroy	all	copies	of	the	works	possessed	in	a	physical	medium

and	discontinue	all	use	of	and	all	access	to	other	copies	of

Project	Gutenberg-tm	works.

-	You	provide,	in	accordance	with	paragraph	1.F.3,	a	full	refund	of	any

money	paid	for	a	work	or	a	replacement	copy,	if	a	defect	in	the

electronic	work	is	discovered	and	reported	to	you	within	90	days

of	receipt	of	the	work.

-	You	comply	with	all	other	terms	of	this	agreement	for	free

distribution	of	Project	Gutenberg-tm	works.

1.E.9.		If	you	wish	to	charge	a	fee	or	distribute	a	Project	Gutenberg-tm

electronic	work	or	group	of	works	on	different	terms	than	are	set

forth	in	this	agreement,	you	must	obtain	permission	in	writing	from

both	the	Project	Gutenberg	Literary	Archive	Foundation	and	Michael

Hart,	the	owner	of	the	Project	Gutenberg-tm	trademark.		Contact	the

Foundation	as	set	forth	in	Section	3	below.

1.F.

1.F.1.		Project	Gutenberg	volunteers	and	employees	expend	considerable

effort	to	identify,	do	copyright	research	on,	transcribe	and	proofread

public	domain	works	in	creating	the	Project	Gutenberg-tm

collection.		Despite	these	efforts,	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic

works,	and	the	medium	on	which	they	may	be	stored,	may	contain

"Defects,"	such	as,	but	not	limited	to,	incomplete,	inaccurate	or

corrupt	data,	transcription	errors,	a	copyright	or	other	intellectual

property	infringement,	a	defective	or	damaged	disk	or	other	medium,	a

computer	virus,	or	computer	codes	that	damage	or	cannot	be	read	by

your	equipment.

1.F.2.		LIMITED	WARRANTY,	DISCLAIMER	OF	DAMAGES	-	Except	for	the	"Right

of	Replacement	or	Refund"	described	in	paragraph	1.F.3,	the	Project

Gutenberg	Literary	Archive	Foundation,	the	owner	of	the	Project

Gutenberg-tm	trademark,	and	any	other	party	distributing	a	Project

Gutenberg-tm	electronic	work	under	this	agreement,	disclaim	all

liability	to	you	for	damages,	costs	and	expenses,	including	legal

fees.		YOU	AGREE	THAT	YOU	HAVE	NO	REMEDIES	FOR	NEGLIGENCE,	STRICT

LIABILITY,	BREACH	OF	WARRANTY	OR	BREACH	OF	CONTRACT	EXCEPT	THOSE

PROVIDED	IN	PARAGRAPH	F3.		YOU	AGREE	THAT	THE	FOUNDATION,	THE

TRADEMARK	OWNER,	AND	ANY	DISTRIBUTOR	UNDER	THIS	AGREEMENT	WILL	NOT	BE

LIABLE	TO	YOU	FOR	ACTUAL,	DIRECT,	INDIRECT,	CONSEQUENTIAL,	PUNITIVE	OR

INCIDENTAL	DAMAGES	EVEN	IF	YOU	GIVE	NOTICE	OF	THE	POSSIBILITY	OF	SUCH

DAMAGE.

1.F.3.		LIMITED	RIGHT	OF	REPLACEMENT	OR	REFUND	-	If	you	discover	a defect	in	this	electronic	work	within	90	days	of	receiving	it,	you	can

receive	a	refund	of	the	money	(if	any)	you	paid	for	it	by	sending	a

written	explanation	to	the	person	you	received	the	work	from.		If	you

received	the	work	on	a	physical	medium,	you	must	return	the	medium	with

your	written	explanation.		The	person	or	entity	that	provided	you	with

the	defective	work	may	elect	to	provide	a	replacement	copy	in	lieu	of	a

refund.		If	you	received	the	work	electronically,	the	person	or	entity

providing	it	to	you	may	choose	to	give	you	a	second	opportunity	to

receive	the	work	electronically	in	lieu	of	a	refund.		If	the	second	copy

is	also	defective,	you	may	demand	a	refund	in	writing	without	further

opportunities	to	fix	the	problem.

1.F.4.		Except	for	the	limited	right	of	replacement	or	refund	set	forth

in	paragraph	1.F.3,	this	work	is	provided	to	you	'AS-IS'	WITH	NO	OTHER

WARRANTIES	OF	ANY	KIND,	EXPRESS	OR	IMPLIED,	INCLUDING	BUT	NOT	LIMITED	TO

WARRANTIES	OF	MERCHANTIBILITY	OR	FITNESS	FOR	ANY	PURPOSE.

1.F.5.		Some	states	do	not	allow	disclaimers	of	certain	implied

warranties	or	the	exclusion	or	limitation	of	certain	types	of	damages.

If	any	disclaimer	or	limitation	set	forth	in	this	agreement	violates	the

law	of	the	state	applicable	to	this	agreement,	the	agreement	shall	be

interpreted	to	make	the	maximum	disclaimer	or	limitation	permitted	by

the	applicable	state	law.		The	invalidity	or	unenforceability	of	any

provision	of	this	agreement	shall	not	void	the	remaining	provisions.

1.F.6.		INDEMNITY	-	You	agree	to	indemnify	and	hold	the	Foundation,	the

trademark	owner,	any	agent	or	employee	of	the	Foundation,	anyone

providing	copies	of	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	in	accordance

with	this	agreement,	and	any	volunteers	associated	with	the	production,

promotion	and	distribution	of	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic	works,

harmless	from	all	liability,	costs	and	expenses,	including	legal	fees,

that	arise	directly	or	indirectly	from	any	of	the	following	which	you	do

or	cause	to	occur:	(a)	distribution	of	this	or	any	Project	Gutenberg-tm

work,	(b)	alteration,	modification,	or	additions	or	deletions	to	any

Project	Gutenberg-tm	work,	and	(c)	any	Defect	you	cause.

Section		2.		Information	about	the	Mission	of	Project	Gutenberg-tm

Project	Gutenberg-tm	is	synonymous	with	the	free	distribution	of

electronic	works	in	formats	readable	by	the	widest	variety	of	computers

including	obsolete,	old,	middle-aged	and	new	computers.		It	exists

because	of	the	efforts	of	hundreds	of	volunteers	and	donations	from

people	in	all	walks	of	life.

Volunteers	and	financial	support	to	provide	volunteers	with	the

assistance	they	need,	is	critical	to	reaching	Project	Gutenberg-tm's

goals	and	ensuring	that	the	Project	Gutenberg-tm	collection	will

remain	freely	available	for	generations	to	come.		In	2001,	the	Project

Gutenberg	Literary	Archive	Foundation	was	created	to	provide	a	secure

and	permanent	future	for	Project	Gutenberg-tm	and	future	generations.

To	learn	more	about	the	Project	Gutenberg	Literary	Archive	Foundation

and	how	your	efforts	and	donations	can	help,	see	Sections	3	and	4

and	the	Foundation	web	page	at	http://www.pglaf.org.

Section	3.		Information	about	the	Project	Gutenberg	Literary	Archive

Foundation

The	Project	Gutenberg	Literary	Archive	Foundation	is	a	non	profit

501(c)(3)	educational	corporation	organized	under	the	laws	of	the

state	of	Mississippi	and	granted	tax	exempt	status	by	the	Internal

Revenue	Service.		The	Foundation's	EIN	or	federal	tax	identification number	is	64-6221541.		Its	501(c)(3)	letter	is	posted	at

http://pglaf.org/fundraising.		Contributions	to	the	Project	Gutenberg

Literary	Archive	Foundation	are	tax	deductible	to	the	full	extent

permitted	by	U.S.	federal	laws	and	your	state's	laws.

The	Foundation's	principal	office	is	located	at	4557	Melan	Dr.	S.

Fairbanks,	AK,	99712.,	but	its	volunteers	and	employees	are	scattered

throughout	numerous	locations.		Its	business	office	is	located	at

809	North	1500	West,	Salt	Lake	City,	UT	84116,	(801)	596-1887,	email

business@pglaf.org.		Email	contact	links	and	up	to	date	contact

information	can	be	found	at	the	Foundation's	web	site	and	official

page	at	http://pglaf.org

For	additional	contact	information:

Dr.	Gregory	B.	Newby

Chief	Executive	and	Director

gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section	4.		Information	about	Donations	to	the	Project	Gutenberg

Literary	Archive	Foundation

Project	Gutenberg-tm	depends	upon	and	cannot	survive	without	wide

spread	public	support	and	donations	to	carry	out	its	mission	of

increasing	the	number	of	public	domain	and	licensed	works	that	can	be

freely	distributed	in	machine	readable	form	accessible	by	the	widest

array	of	equipment	including	outdated	equipment.		Many	small	donations

($1	to	$5,000)	are	particularly	important	to	maintaining	tax	exempt

status	with	the	IRS.

The	Foundation	is	committed	to	complying	with	the	laws	regulating

charities	and	charitable	donations	in	all	50	states	of	the	United

States.		Compliance	requirements	are	not	uniform	and	it	takes	a

considerable	effort,	much	paperwork	and	many	fees	to	meet	and	keep	up

with	these	requirements.		We	do	not	solicit	donations	in	locations

where	we	have	not	received	written	confirmation	of	compliance.		To

SEND	DONATIONS	or	determine	the	status	of	compliance	for	any

particular	state	visit	http://pglaf.org

While	we	cannot	and	do	not	solicit	contributions	from	states	where	we

have	not	met	the	solicitation	requirements,	we	know	of	no	prohibition

against	accepting	unsolicited	donations	from	donors	in	such	states	who

approach	us	with	offers	to	donate.

International	donations	are	gratefully	accepted,	but	we	cannot	make

any	statements	concerning	tax	treatment	of	donations	received	from

outside	the	United	States.		U.S.	laws	alone	swamp	our	small	staff.

Please	check	the	Project	Gutenberg	Web	pages	for	current	donation

methods	and	addresses.		Donations	are	accepted	in	a	number	of	other

ways	including	including	checks,	online	payments	and	credit	card

donations.		To	donate,	please	visit:	http://pglaf.org/donate

Section	5.		General	Information	About	Project	Gutenberg-tm	electronic

works.

Professor	Michael	S.	Hart	is	the	originator	of	the	Project	Gutenberg-tm

concept	of	a	library	of	electronic	works	that	could	be	freely	shared

with	anyone.		For	thirty	years,	he	produced	and	distributed	Project

Gutenberg-tm	eBooks	with	only	a	loose	network	of	volunteer	support.

Project	Gutenberg-tm	eBooks	are	often	created	from	several	printed editions,	all	of	which	are	confirmed	as	Public	Domain	in	the	U.S.

unless	a	copyright	notice	is	included.		Thus,	we	do	not	necessarily

keep	eBooks	in	compliance	with	any	particular	paper	edition.

Most	people	start	at	our	Web	site	which	has	the	main	PG	search	facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This	Web	site	includes	information	about	Project	Gutenberg-tm,

including	how	to	make	donations	to	the	Project	Gutenberg	Literary

Archive	Foundation,	how	to	help	produce	our	new	eBooks,	and	how	to

subscribe	to	our	email	newsletter	to	hear	about	new	eBooks.





Document Outline


A YANKEE IN THE TRENCHES

R. DERBY HOLMES Dedication





FOREWORD CONTENTS LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS





A YANKEE IN THE TRENCHES

CHAPTER I JOINING THE BRITISH ARMY





CHAPTER II GOING IN





CHAPTER III A TRENCH RAID





CHAPTER IV A FEW DAYS' REST IN BILLETS





CHAPTER V FEEDING THE TOMMIES





CHAPTER VI HIKING TO VIMY RIDGE





CHAPTER VII FASCINATION OF PATROL WORK





CHAPTER VIII ON THE GO





CHAPTER IX FIRST SIGHT OF THE TANKS





CHAPTER X FOLLOWING THE TANKS INTO BATTLE





CHAPTER XI PRISONERS





CHAPTER XII I BECOME A BOMBER





CHAPTER XIII BACK ON THE SOMME AGAIN





CHAPTER XIV THE LAST TIME OVER THE TOP





CHAPTER XV BITS OF BLIGHTY





CHAPTER XVI SUGGESTIONS FOR "SAMMY"

GLOSSARY OF ARMY SLANG





